======================================================================
POLICY PDF TEXT EXTRACTION
======================================================================
File: NCD_LCD_Syn_data/L39240/LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240).pdf
Pages: 59
Extraction method: PyMuPDF text
Text cleaning: Applied (two-layer)
Title: LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
----------------------------------------------------------------------
EXTRACTED TEXT:
----------------------------------------------------------------------
LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)

Local Coverage Determination (LCD) | Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain | Management

L39240

Contractor Information

Contract Contract
Contractor Name Type Number Jurisdiction States

Noridian A and B 01111 - J - E California -
Healthcare MAC MAC A Entire State Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 01112 - J - E California -
Healthcare MAC MAC B Northern Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 01182 - J - E California -
Healthcare MAC MAC B Southern Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 01211 - J - E American
Healthcare MAC MAC A Samoa | Solutions, LLC Guam | Hawaii | Northern | Mariana Islands

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)

Contract Contract
Contractor Name Type Number Jurisdiction States

Noridian A and B 01212 - J - E American
Healthcare MAC MAC B Samoa | Solutions, LLC Guam | Hawaii | Northern | Mariana Islands

Noridian A and B 01311 - J - E Nevada
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 01312 - J - E Nevada
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 01911 - J - E American
Healthcare MAC MAC A Samoa Solutions, LLC California -
Entire State | Guam | Hawaii | Nevada | Northern | Mariana Islands

Noridian A and B 02101 - J - F Alaska
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 02102 - J - F Alaska
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)

Contract Contract
Contractor Name Type Number Jurisdiction States

Noridian A and B 02201 - J - F Idaho
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 02202 - J - F Idaho
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 02301 - J - F Oregon
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 02302 - J - F Oregon
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 02401 - J - F Washington
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 02402 - J - F Washington
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03101 - J - F Arizona
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03102 - J - F Arizona
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)

Contract Contract
Contractor Name Type Number Jurisdiction States

Noridian A and B 03201 - J - F Montana
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03202 - J - F Montana
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03301 - J - F North Dakota
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03302 - J - F North Dakota
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03401 - J - F South Dakota
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03402 - J - F South Dakota
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03501 - J - F Utah
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03502 - J - F Utah
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)

Contract Contract
Contractor Name Type Number Jurisdiction States

Noridian A and B 03601 - J - F Wyoming
Healthcare MAC MAC A | Solutions, LLC

Noridian A and B 03602 - J - F Wyoming
Healthcare MAC MAC B | Solutions, LLC

LCD Information

Document Information

LCD ID | L39240

LCD Title | Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management

Proposed LCD in Comment Period N/A

Source Proposed LCD | DL39240

Original Effective Date For services performed on or after 06/
Revision Effective Date For services performed on or after 09/
Revision Ending Date N/A

Retirement Date N/A

Notice Period Start Date 05/

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)

Notice Period End Date 06/

Fee schedules, relative value units, conversion factors and/or related components are not assigned by the AMA, are not part of CPT, and the AMA is not recommending their use. The AMA does not directly or indirectly practice medicine or
dispense medical services. The AMA assumes no liability for data contained or not contained herein.

Copyright © 2025, the American Hospital Association, Chicago, Illinois. Reproduced with permission. No portion of the AHA copyrighted materials contained within this publication may be copied without the express written consent of the AHA.
AHA copyrighted materials including the UB‐04 codes and descriptions may not be removed, copied, or utilized within any software, product, service, solution, or derivative work without the written consent of the AHA. If an entity wishes to utilize
any AHA materials, please contact the AHA at 312‐893‐6816.

Making copies or utilizing the content of the UB‐04 Manual, including the codes and/or descriptions, for internal purposes, resale and/or to be used in any product or publication; creating any modified or derivative work of the UB‐04 Manual and/or
codes and descriptions; and/or making any commercial use of UB‐04 Manual or any portion thereof, including the codes and/or descriptions, is only authorized with an express license from the American Hospital Association. The American
Hospital Association (the "AHA") has not reviewed, and is not responsible for, the completeness or accuracy of any information contained in this material, nor was the AHA or any of its affiliates, involved in the preparation of this material,
or the analysis of information provided in the material. The views and/or positions presented in the material do not necessarily represent the views of the AHA. CMS and its products and services are not endorsed by the AHA or any of its
affiliates.

Issue

Issue Description
This LCD describes the coverage, limitations and medical necessity criteria for epidural injections and is aligned with other MAC Contractors epidural injections LCDs.

Issue - Explanation of Change Between Proposed LCD and Final LCD Editorial changes made to clarify where to place the needle for TFESIs, applicable conditions
in which the use of contrast is contraindicated, clarified definitions and corrected typographical errors.

CMS National Coverage Policy
This LCD supplements but does not replace, modify or supersede existing Medicare applicable National Coverage Determinations (NCDs) or payment policy rules and
regulations for epidural procedures for pain management. Federal statute and subsequent Medicare regulations regarding provision and payment for medical services are lengthy.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
They are not repeated in this LCD. Neither Medicare payment policy rules nor this LCD replace, modify or supersede applicable state statutes regarding medical practice or other
health practice professions acts, definitions and/or scopes of practice. All providers who report services for Medicare payment must fully understand and follow all existing laws,
regulations and rules for Medicare payment for epidural procedures for pain management and must properly submit only valid claims for them. Please review and understand them
and apply the medical necessity provisions in the policy within the context of the manual rules. Relevant CMS manual instructions and policies may be found in the following Internet-
Only Manuals (IOMs) published on the CMS Web site:

IOM Citations:

CMS IOM Publication 100-08, MedicareProgramIntegrityManual, Chapter 13, Section 13.5.4 Reasonable and Necessary Provision in an LCD

Social Security Act (Title XVIII) Standard References:

Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, Section 1862(a)(1)(A) states that no Medicare payment shall be made for items or services which are not reasonable and necessary
for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury.
Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, Section 1862(a)(7). This section excludes routine physical examinations.

Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) References:

CFR, Title 42, Chapter IV, Sections 410.74 Physician assistants' services, 410.75 Nurse practitioners' services and 410.76 Clinical nurse specialists' services.

Coverage Guidance

Coverage Indications, Limitations, and/or Medical Necessity

Compliance with the provisions in this LCD may be monitored and addressed through post payment data analysis and subsequent medical review audits.

History/Background and/or General Information

Low back pain is highly prevalent, with reports of 50-84% of adults experiencing back pain at some point, with a high prevalence in adults 65 and older and the highest cause of
disability globally. Low back and neck pain can influence the quality of life and function, and is associated with depression and anxiety.1,2 In a 2018 National Health Interview Survey,
the CDC reported 28% of men and 31.6% of women age ≥ 18 had lower back pain in the past three months. 3 There is debate and a lack of consensus on which modalities are best to
treat chronic low back pain (CLBP). 4

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
The epidural space lies outside the dural membrane inside the spinal canal. It runs the length of the spine and, in addition to the exiting nerve roots, contains fatty tissue and blood
vessels. The spinal nerve roots can be affected by a number of processes as they travel through the epidural space, including but not limited to compression from herniation of the
nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral discs, degenerative changes involving combinations of the spinal ligaments, discs, zygapophyseal (facet) joints, intraspinal synovial cysts,
osteophytes, and mechanical derangements of the spine such as spondylolisthesis. As a result of mechanical irritation, inflammation, injury to a spinal nerve root or other processes,
the spinal nerve roots can become a significant and disabling source of radicular pain1 epidural steroid injections (ESIs) have been used as a non-surgical modality to treat low
back and neck pain. These procedures typically involve the injection of a solution containing corticosteroids and/or anesthetic into the epidural space, although saline may be included at
times.

The ESI can be performed in three ways. Interlaminar (IESI) approaches the epidural space from the posterior spine between the two vertebral laminae near the midline. In the
transforaminal approach (TFESI), the injectant is delivered through the neuroforamen adjacent to the nerve root within the intervertebral foramen. The caudal approach (CESI)
enters through the sacral hiatus at the sacral canal to access the epidural space.1,4

The treatment of individuals with spinal disorders, including pain, can be complex, and it is recommended that all individuals being considered for interventional spinal procedures
undergo a thorough evaluation and be treated following development of a comprehensive care plan.

Covered Indications

1. Epidural steroid injection (ESI) will be considered medically reasonable and necessary when the following three (3) requirements are met:

History, physical examination, and concordant radiological image-based diagnostic testing supporting one of the following5 :

Lumbar, cervical or thoracic radiculopathy, radicular pain and/or neurogenic claudication due to disc herniation, osteophyte or osteophyte complexes,
severe degenerative disc disease, producing foraminal or central spinal stenosis5 ; OR
Post-laminectomy syndrome6-8; OR Acute herpes zoster associated pain6

AND

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
Radiculopathy, radicular pain and/or neurogenic claudication is severe enough to greatly impact quality of life or function. An objective pain scale or functional
assessment must be performed at baseline (prior to interventions). The same scale* must be repeated at each follow-up for assessment of response.

AND

Pain duration of at least four (4) weeks, and the inability to tolerate noninvasive conservative care or medical documentation of failure to respond to four (4) weeks
of noninvasive conservative care or acute herpes zoster refractory to conservative management where a four (4) week wait is not required.9

2. The ESIs must be performed under CT or fluoroscopy image guidance with contrast, 10 unless the patient has a documented allergy to low molecular weight nonionic contrast. If
the patient has such an allergy, ultrasound guidance without contrast may be considered. If the patient is pregnant, ultrasound guidance without contrast may also be considered.

3. Transforaminal epidural steroid injections (TFESIs) involving a maximum of two (2) levels in one spinal region are considered medically reasonable and necessary. It is important to
recognize that most conditions would not ordinarily require ESI at two (2) levels in one spinal region.11

4. Caudal epidural steroid injections (CESIs) and interlaminar epidural steroid injections (ILESIs) involving a maximum of one level are considered medically reasonable and
necessary. 11

5. It is medically reasonable and necessary to perform TFESIs bilaterally only when clinically indicated.

6. Repeat ESI when the first injection directly and significantly provided improvement of the condition being treated may be considered medically reasonable and necessary when the
medical record documents at least 50% of sustained improvement in pain relief and/or improvement in function measured from baseline using SAME scale* for at least three
months. 7,8 If a patient fails to respond well to the initial ESI, a repeat ESI after 14 days can be performed, using a different approach, level and/or medication if appropriate, with the
rationale and medical necessity for the second ESI documented in the medical record.

7. An initial injection of contrast is required to confirm epidural placement, unless the patient has a contraindication to contrast. The subsequent epidural steroid injections should include
corticosteroids and may be combined with anesthetics or saline.1

8. The ESIs should be performed in conjunction with conservative treatments. 9

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
9. Patient’s should be part of an active rehabilitation program, home exercise program or functional restoration program.10,12

*Note: The scales used to measure of pain and/or disability must be documented in the medical record. Acceptable scales include but are not limited to: verbal rating scales,
Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) and Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for pain assessment, and Pain
Disability Assessment Scale (PDAS), Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), Oswestry Low Back
Pain Disability Questionnaire (OSW), Quebec Back Pain Disability Scale (QUE), Roland
Morris Pain Scale, Back Pain Functional Scale (BPFS), and the PROMIS profile domains to assess function.

Limitations

1. Injections performed without image guidance or by ultrasound are not considered reasonable and necessary except in cases of documented contraindication to contrast
media (e.g., allergy, pregnancy).13-15

2. ESIs performed with biologicals or other substances not FDA designated for this use is considered investigational and not medically reasonable and necessary.

3. It is not considered medically reasonable and necessary to perform multiple blocks (ESI, sympathetic blocks, facet blocks, trigger point injections etc.) during the same session as
ESIs, with the exception of a facet synovial cyst and ESI performed in the same session.

4. Use of Moderate or Deep Sedation, General Anesthesia, and Monitored Anesthesia Care (MAC) is usually unnecessary or rarely indicated for these procedures and therefore not
considered medically reasonable and necessary. 16 Even in patients with a needle phobia and anxiety, typically oral anxiolytics suffice. In exceptional and unique cases,
documentation must clearly establish the need for such sedation in the specific patient.

5. ESIs to treat non-specific low back pain (LBP), axial spine pain, complex regional pain syndrome, widespread diffuse pain, pain from neuropathy from other causes, cervicogenic
headaches are considered investigational and therefore are not considered medically reasonable and necessary. 6,17,18

6. ESIs are limited to a maximum of four (4) sessions per spinal region in a rolling twelve (12)
month period.7

7. It is not considered medically reasonable and necessary for more than one spinal region to be injected in the same session.11

8. It is not considered medically reasonable and necessary to perform TFESIs at more than two (2) nerve root levels during the same session.11

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
9. It is not considered medically reasonable and necessary to perform CESIs or ILESIs at more than one (1) level during the same session.11

10. It is not medically reasonable and necessary to perform CESIs or ILESIs bilaterally.14

11. It is not medically reasonable and necessary to prescribe a predetermined series of ESIs. 8

12. Steroid dosing should be the lowest effective amount, it is recommended not to exceed 80 mg of triamcinolone, 12 mg of betamethasone, 15 mg of dexamethasone per session.16

13. It generally would not be considered medically reasonable and necessary for treatment with ESI to extend beyond 12 months.19,20 Frequent continuation of epidural steroid
injections over 12 months may trigger a focused medical review. Use beyond twelve months requires the following:

a. Pain is severe enough to cause a significant degree of functional disability or vocational disability.
b. ESI provides at least 50% sustained improvement of pain and/or 50% objective improvement in function (using same scale as baseline).
c. Rationale for the continuation of ESIs including but not limited to patient is high-risk surgical candidates, the patient does not desire surgery, recurrence of pain in the same
location relieved with ESIs for at least three months d. The primary care provider must be notified regarding continuation of procedures and
prolonged repeat steroid use.

14. ESIs should not be performed when contraindicated including but not limited to:
suspected or active localized spinal infection, significant systemic infection, compressive lesions of the spinal cord, conus medullaris or cauda equina, suspicion or major risk factors
for cancer. 11

Provider Qualifications

Medicare Program Integrity Manual states services will be considered medically reasonable and necessary only if performed by appropriately trained providers.

Procedures listed and included in this LCD do not constitute anesthesia services. Evaluation, methods and techniques specified are not considered routine for surgical or perioperative
anesthesia.

Patient safety and quality of care mandate that healthcare professionals who perform epidural injections/procedures for chronic pain (not surgical anesthesia) are appropriately
trained and/ or credentialed by a formal residency/fellowship program and/or are certified by either an accredited and nationally recognized organization or by a post-graduate training
course accredited by an established national accrediting body or accredited professional training program whose core curriculum includes the performance and management of the

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
procedures addressed in this policy. Credentialing or privileges are required for procedures performed in inpatient and outpatient settings. 21,22

All aspects of care must be within the provider’s medical licensure and scope of practice.
Reimbursement for procedures utilizing imaging techniques may be made to providers who meet training requirements for the procedures in this policy only if their respective state
allows such in their practice act and formally licenses or certifies the practitioner to use and interpret these imaging modalities (ionizing radiation and associated contrast material,
magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound). At a minimum, training must cover and develop an understanding of anatomy and drug pharmacodynamics and kinetics as well as
proficiency in diagnosis and management of disease, the technical performance of the procedure, and utilization of the required associated imaging modalities.

Notice: Services performed for any given diagnosis must meet all of the indications and limitations stated in this LCD, the general requirements for medical necessity as stated in
CMS payment policy manuals, any and all existing CMS national coverage determinations, and all Medicare payment rules.

Definitions

Acute Low Back Pain – Low back pain, which is present for up to six weeks.

Caudal epidural steroid injection (CESI) – The administration via injection of contrast (absent allergy to contrast), followed by the introduction of corticosteroids and possibly a local
anesthetic into the epidural space of the spine by inserting a needle through the sacral hiatus under fluoroscopic guidance into the epidural space at the sacral canal.

Cervicobrachialgia- Pain in the neck radiating to the arm, caused by compression of nerve roots of the cervical spine.

Conservative Therapy – Consists of an appropriate combination of medication (for example, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory [NSAIDs], analgesics, etc.) in addition to physical therapy,
spinal manipulation therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), home exercise program, or other interventions based on the individual’s specific presentation, physical findings, and
imaging results.

Disability – Activity limitations and/or participation restrictions in an individual with a health condition, disorder or disease.23

Discogenic pain – Pain originating from damaged vertebral disc, particularly, but not always, due to degenerative disc disease.

Epidural steroid injection – The administration via injection of contrast (absent allergy to contrast), followed by the introduction of a corticosteroid and possibly a local anesthetic into
the epidural space of the spine.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
GRADE – A system developed by the GRADE Working Group to address the shortcomings of present grading systems in healthcare. The GRADE system uses a common, sensible, and
transparent approach to grading the quality of evidence. The results of applying the GRADE system to clinical trial data are displayed in a table known as a GRADE profile.

Impairment – A significant deviation, loss, or loss of use of any body structure or body function in an individual with a health condition, disorder, or disease.23

Interlaminar epidural steroid injection (ILESI) – An injection of contrast (absent allergy to contrast), followed by the introduction of a corticosteroid and possibly a local anesthetic into
the epidural space of the spine either through a paramedian or midline interlaminar approach under fluoroscopic guidance.

Level – The spinal roots that enter and exit the spinal column between each of the vertebral segments cervical (C1-C8), thoracic (T1-T2), lumbar levels (L1-L5), and Sacral (S1-S5).

Multidisciplinary biopsychosocial rehabilitation (MBR) – Targets physical as well as psychological and social aspects of LBP and involves a team of healthcare providers with
different professional backgrounds and training.10

Non-Radicular Back Pain – The radiating non-neuropathic pain which is not causally related to a spinal nerve root irritation and does not produce reproducible neuropathic symptoms in
an objective dermatomal pattern.

Neural foramina – (also called intervertebral foramen) The openings between each pair of vertebra where a number of structures pass through.

Neurogenic claudication – (also known as pseudoclaudication) The physical manifestation of leg pain, leg weakness, or leg heaviness exacerbated by walking and relieved with leaning
forward or sitting down.

Nonspecific low back pain – Back pain that cannot be attributed to a specific disease or spinal pathology.

Osteophyte – An exostosis or benign osteoma of the facet joints or vertebral endplates.

Osteophyte Complex – The protrusion of disc material, buckling of the ligamentum flavum, joint hypertrophy, and osteophytes.

Peripheral neuropathic pain – Pain is causally related to a lesion or disease of the peripheral somatosensory nerves.

Post-laminectomy syndrome – A group of symptoms following a lumbar laminectomy which include diffuse low back pain with associated dull and aching pain involving the legs.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
Radicular Back Pain – Radicular pain is nerve root pain radiating from the affected spinal segment in a distribution concordant with the known distribution of the nerve root.

Radiculopathy – Radiating neuropathic pain causally related to the spinal nerve root irritation, which extends distally, producing neuropathic pain in a myotomal or dermatomal
pattern.

Radiculitis – Inflammation of the nerve roots which produces radicular pain without objective neurological findings on physical examination.

Session – A time period, which includes all procedures (i.e., medial branch blocks (MBB), intraarticular injections (IA), facet cyst ruptures, and RFA ablations) performed during one
day.

Transforaminal epidural steroid injection (TFESI) – An epidural injection performed via a paramedian approach to enter the epidural space by placing the needle in the intervertebral
foramen (neuroforamen) to inject near the dorsal root ganglion and exiting spinal nerve root (previously known as a selective nerve root block).

Selective Nerve Root Block (SNRB) – A diagnostic injection of contrast (absent allergy to contrast) of a single nerve root to assist with surgical planning, followed by the introduction
of a local anesthetic by inserting a needle into the neuroforamen under fluoroscopic or computed tomography (CT) guidance. SNRB’s are erroneously referred to as a
Transforaminal Epidural Steroid Injection (TFESI), although technically, SNRB’s involve the introduction of anesthetic only used for diagnostic purposes.

Spinal stenosis – The narrowing of the central spinal canal or foraminal openings, usually due to spinal degeneration that occurs with aging. It may also be the result of spinal disc
herniation, osteoarthritis, or a tumor. Lumbar spinal stenosis results in low back pain and pain or abnormal sensations in the legs, thighs, feet, or buttocks, or loss of bladder and
bowel control. Neurogenic claudication is often a clinical condition that results from spinal stenosis.

Spondylolisthesis- A disorder of the spinal cord in which one vertebra slips onto the vertebra below it resulting in pain in lower back or legs.

Subacute Pain – The temporal definition of pain occurring during the six to twelve-week time period.

Chronic pain – The temporal definition of pain occurring 12 weeks after the onset of the pain.

Contractor Advisory Committee Meeting 2/ A Multi-jurisdictional contract advisory committee meeting of subject matter experts (SMEs)
was convened on 02/11/2021 regarding epidural injections and procedures. The transcript,

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
voting results, and audio are available on each MACs website. The panel consisted of experts in pain management including anesthesiology and physical medicine and
rehabilitation, as well as neuroradiology, internal medicine, and a certified nurse anesthetist with representation throughout the country and including academic and clinical experts. The
panel will be referred to as SMEs, and their input incorporated through the review to correlate the evidence with expert input.

Summary of Evidence Acute low back pain, defined as low back pain with less than four weeks duration, has an
excellent prognosis to recover within the first four to six weeks. Initially, treatments include non-invasive therapies, including pharmacologic and non-pharmacological measures.
Patients with acute or subacute nonspecific low back pain typically would not be considered candidates for interventional therapies, as they could still improve with noninvasive
therapies, and there is little evidence on the efficacy of invasive therapies in this circumstance.24 The American College of Physicians offers a strong recommendation for
non-pharmacological measures as the first line treatment. Recommended non- pharmacological measures include conservative measures such as superficial heat, exercise,
multidisciplinary rehabilitation, acupuncture, mindfulness-based stress reduction having moderate-quality evidence. For pharmacologic therapy, they recommend non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as first line treatment, and muscle relaxants, as second-line treatment. 25 Systemic steroids may provide benefits with three randomized control trials
showing benefit, especially in the short term. The benefit of anticonvulsants and antidepressants is overall low quality, but there is potential benefit in some patients.26 A
systematic review comparing ESIs to conservative treatment for patients with lumbosacral radicular pain reported that ESIs were more effective for alleviating lumbosacral radicular
pain but not function in both short and intermediate -term compared to conservative treatment, however this effect was not maintained at long-term follow-up. 27 It is standard
practice to utilize conservative treatment measures for the management of acute low back pain. When back pain persists over twelve weeks, it is considered chronic low back pain,
and spontaneous recovery is less likely. The SMEs voted 3/5 (range 2-5) that there is evidence to support periods of conservative management prior to treatment with epidural
injections. The panel discussed time for conservative care is related stronger to the natural history of the disease than the evidence, as it has not been well studied. The panel voted
low confidence (2/5; range 1-5) in terms of evidence to support documentation of failure of at least two classes of medication prior to ESI. The use of medication is more controversial
due to the risk associated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory, specifically gastrointestinal complications, and the risk of opioid addiction with opioid use. Other medications remain
available, but there is not strong evidence to support one specific category of medication.

Patients with low back pain should be evaluated for the underlying condition, and targeted treatments implemented. History and physical examination, including a neurological exam to
evaluate for radicular pain, should be performed. Imaging should be targeted to identify

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
specific differential diagnoses and is not typically indicated in the early evaluation of low back pain.28 The American College of Radiology (ARC) offers evidence-based criteria for
imaging for low back pain.29 According to the ARC Criteria, patients who have acute, subacute, or chronic low back pain or radiculopathy with persistent or progressive
symptoms during or following six weeks of conservative management are considered candidates for surgery or intervention. Imaging may be considered for patients who have
had no improvement in their back pain after six weeks of medical management and physical therapy. Imaging is classified as “may be appropriate”, with magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of the lumbar spine without contrast classified as “usually appropriate” and computed tomography (CT) if MRI is unavailable” as needed for diagnostics. The American College of
Occupational and Environmental Medicine guidelines state that while diagnostic tests are not indicated for the majority of low back pain, the literature supports CT or MRI.30 The ESIs
are utilized as an option for a specific diagnosis, and therefore a thorough evaluation to achieve diagnosis is a necessary step prior to consideration of ESIs. In most cases, by the
time ESIs are considered, imaging has been completed as part of the evaluation. Any prior imaging should be reviewed for anatomy prior to interventional procedures. The SMEs voted
low confidence 2/5; (range 1-4) that radicular pain should be concordant with a radiologist’s interpretation of an advanced diagnostic study demonstrating compression of the involved
nerve root. The concern was that the imaging study is a static image in a dynamic process and the compression may be missed in the supine position even if present. The SMEs felt
there was benefit in obtaining imaging to aid in diagnosis, such as to reveal anatomical features that may guide treatment options or alter approach, selection of needle size and
appropriate segmental level. There was also concern that imaging would not reveal non- anatomical sources like chemical radiculitis.

Safety

Epidural administration of corticosteroids has not been approved by the FDA and is classified as “off-label” use. While complications with ESIs are rare, they can be devastating.
In 2014, the FDA issued a drug safety communication about the epidural injection of glucocorticoids, noting the potential for rare but serious adverse effects, and the
effectiveness has not been established.31 The warning followed two separate outbreaks of fungal meningitis 2002 and 2012-2013 linked to ESIs and multitudes of case reports on
related complications. After the FDA warning, there was a flurry of papers to document safety and provide protocols and /or guidelines to improve safety. The reported risk of ESIs
includes loss of vision, stroke, dural puncture, infection, spinal cord injury, paralysis, and death. In addition to intra-arterial injections of particulate steroids, arachnoiditis, nerve
damage, osteomyelitis, hemorrhage, and epidural abscess have been reported.1,32 In a 2015 review on trends in safety and complications, the author explains the reasons for these risks
stating “significant neurological complications associated with transforaminal injections include stroke and spinal cord injury, which arise due to the need to place the needle within

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
the intervertebral foramina. This space contains radicular arteries that perfuse the spinal cord and course adjacent to the targeted spinal nerve root, creating a challenge when
variations in anatomical structure are present”. 1 A 2018 survey of 249 interventional pain management physicians (13.8% response rate) demonstrated a high level of variability and
lack of standardized practices. They reported that in interlaminar epidural steroid injection practice patterns, there is a lack of standardization in needle sizes, use of imaging, and
choice of injectant.33 The lack of evidence-based standardized practice makes it difficult to interpret the literature since these variables exist across existing studies.

A 2015 review on key safety when administering ESIs states the FDA identified 131 neurological adverse events, including 41 cases of arachnoiditis and 700 cases of fungal
meningitis following injection of contaminated steroids. They further explain that most complications were related to TFESIs, specifically cervical TFESIs. They conclude that proper
technique can avoid injury, and lumbar TFESIs can be performed safely; however they warn that cervical TFESIs “must not be performed until appropriate evidence develops and safe
preparations of steroids are available."32 A 2015 multidisciplinary workgroup stated concern regarding the injection of ESIs under sedation and without appropriate precautionary steps,
such as injection of radiographic contrast medium under fluoroscopy; resulting in spinal cord injury. They also expressed concern for using particulate steroids, such as
methylprednisolone, triamcinolone, or betamethasone which have been linked to cerebrovascular occlusion associated with cervical TFESIs.14 This review called for more
standardized safety protocols and research in best practices.

A 2016 multi-institutional study on adverse event rates associated with TFESI and IESI reported no major adverse events in 16,638 consecutive procedures in all spine segments
(14,956 TFESI; 1,682 ILESI). The most common adverse event was a vasovagal reaction in 1.2% of procedures (p=0.004). Dural punctures occurred in 0.06% of procedures, more
commonly after ILESI (0.2% vs 0.04%, p=0.006). Central steroid response (sleeplessness, flushing, non-positional headache) was seen in 2.6% of TFESI and ILESI patients. Patients
that reported increased pain included 2.1% of TFESI and 1.8% of ILESI patients. No long- term sequelae were seen from any immediate or delayed minor adverse event at the time of
the procedure or follow-up.34 A 2012 prospective study on 10,261 fluoroscopic guided epidural procedures included 2,376 cervical interlami­nar epidural injections, 301 thoracic
interlaminar epidural injections, 1,450 lumbar interlaminar epi­dural injections, 1,395 caudal epidural injections, 1,310 lumbar transforaminal epidural injections, and 839 caudal epidural
adhesiolysis procedures. The authors reported an adverse rate of overall intravascular penetration of 4.3%, local bleeding of 63%, 0.5% rate of dural punctures with 0.05% post-
lumbar puncture headache, 0.85% transient nerve irritation of 0.08% as well as transient spinal cord irritation and other minor complications, but no major complications.35

The WIP Benelux Work Group developed evidence-based safety guidelines based on existing literature. In reviewing major complications, they reported that the majority involved

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
direct nerve trauma or spinal cord injury. To reduce the risk of nerve damage, they recommended avoidance of deep sedation so the patient can alert the provider to any
paresthesia during needle placement to minimize this risk.15 The SMEs agreed that evidence supports that ESI should not be performed with moderate sedation or general anesthesia
with a score of 3/5 (range 1-5). The American Society of Anesthesiologist provides definitions on the continuum of the depth of sedation. Minimal sedation anxiolysis is defined
as a drug-induced state during which patients respond normally to verbal commands.
Although cognitive function and physical coordination may be impaired, airway reflexes, and ventilatory and cardiovascular functions are unaffected.36 Progressing depth of sedation
beyond minimal is moderate or “conscious”, deep and general. Monitored Anesthesia Care or “MAC” is not a depth of sedation, but a specific anesthetic service allowing a deeper level of
analgesia than can be provided by moderate sedation.

The impact of glucocorticoids injected into the epidural space is not fully defined. Evidence supports that even a single injection risk includes bone demineralization and increased risk
of fractures in postmenopausal women, suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis, immune dysregulation, and hyperglycemia in patients with diabetes mellitus. 1,16 A
small prospective study in which 28 post-menopausal women who underwent a single ESI (triamcinolone 80mg) had bone mineral density (BMD) measurements completed and
showed a significant decline in the hip BMD of 0.018 g/cm2 (0.028 ± 0.007, P = 0.002) at six months compared with baseline as compared to age-matched control population and
concluded there is a potential deleterious effect of ESI with steroids on BMD 37. A large retrospective cohort study matched 3,000 patients who had ESIs to 3000 similar non-
injected patients. Based on their analysis, they conclude each successive injection increased the fracture risk by a factor of 1.21 (95% confidence interval, 1.08 to 1.30) after adjustment
for covariates (p = 0.003), concluding a 21% increased risk of fracture risk per ESI injection.1,38

In contrast, a 2000 prospective study on the effect of corticosteroids and dose relationship on weight gain and BMD receiving steroids through the neuraxial block included ESI and
facet joint injections. Data were collected on 123 patients divided into two groups. One received injection with local anesthetic (LA) plus steroids, and the other LA alone. A BMD
study was conducted at baseline and repeated at 3, 6, and 12 months and concluded no significant change in BMD at 12 months from baseline.39 However, the ESI doses in this
study were lower than routinely used, so results must be interpreted cautiously. The lack of standardized injectant and dosing make it difficult to determine if there is a safe threshold in
this population. A 2019 retrospective paper reported on 172 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis and with half receiving ESIs. The mean number of ESIs was 6.2, and the mean
cumulative administered dose of glucocorticoids (dexamethasone) was 31 mg. The incidence of fractures in the medication only (for back pain) and ESI groups were 22% and
24%, respectively, in the thoracolumbar spine, and 2% and 5%, respectively, in the hip joint.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
There was no significant difference in the incidence of osteoporotic fractures between the groups suggesting a maximum cumulative dexamethasone dose of 31 mg could be safely
used in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. 40 This was limited by retrospective design and a small sample size. The WIP Benelux Guidelines cite each ESI increases the
fracture risk by 31% and recommends keeping the corticosteroid exposure to a minimum, especially for high-risk individuals such as the elderly and women with prior history of
osteoporosis or osteopenia.16

There are reported cases of suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis after ESI causing Cushing syndrome. While the incidence of Cushing syndrome is low, HPA
access suppression is frequent and can continue for three to six weeks. A diabetic patient’s elevation in glucose levels may be seen after ESI persisting for two to six days after the
initial injection with a risk of hyperglycemia. There is also concern about the impact of corticosteroids on the immune system, and dose-dependent suppression of the immune
system has been reported after ESI.16 In a retrospective study, it was found that corticosteroids reduced the effectiveness of the vaccine and patients were at increased risk
for developing influenza after a major joint injection with corticosteroids (relative risk, 1.52;
95% CI, 1.20-1.93).41 This led to recommendations to avoid elective procedures and reduce steroid dosing for necessary procedures in elderly and high-risk patients during the COVID-
19 pandemic. 42 Subject matter experts agreed with high confidence (4/5; range 2-5) that there is evidence to support a maximal steroid dose for corticosteroid limits for the injection.
The precise maximum is not established with variations in the literature, but there is consistent evidence to use the lowest effective dose.16

Bleeding risks are a significant concern for patients undergoing ESIs. An epidural hematoma can create an expanding volume that compresses the spinal cord and/or nerve roots and can
result in potentially catastrophic neurological complications. This risk is a possibility for hematologically normal patients but significantly higher if on anti-coagulation. The practice
of holding anticoagulation to perform ESIs is controversial. While holding anticoagulation may potentially reduce the risk of bleeding, there is an increased risk of thromboembolic
events during the time patients are off anti-coagulants. A 2012 survey of 325 interventional pain physicians reported the number of bleeding complications after ESI was similar
regardless of whether anticoagulation was held. Still, the reported number of thromboembolic events was 17-times greater when anticoagulants were held compared
with when not held.43 In the American Society for Interventional Pain Physicians (ASIPP)
updated Comprehensive Evidence-Based Guidelines Part II: Guidance and Recommendations the authors’ report 44:

Good evidence for risk of a thromboembolic phenomenon in patients with antithrombotic therapy if discontinued, spontaneous epidural hematomas with or
without traumatic injury in patients with or without anticoagulant therapy to discontinue or normalize the international normalized ratio (INR) with warfarin therapy,

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
and the lack of necessity of discontinuation of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including low dose aspirin prior to performing interventional techniques.
Fair evidence with excessive bleeding, including epidural hematoma formation with interventional techniques when antithrombotic therapy is continued, the risk of a higher
thromboembolic phenomenon than epidural hematomas with discontinuation of antiplatelet therapy before interventional techniques and to continue
phosphodiesterase inhibitors (dipyridamole, cilostazol, and Aggrenox).
Limited evidence to discontinue antiplatelet therapy with platelet aggregation inhibitors to avoid bleeding and epidural hematomas and/or continue antiplatelet therapy
(clopidogrel, ticlopidine, prasugrel) during interventional techniques to avoid cerebrovascular and cardiovascular thromboembolic fatalities.
Limited evidence about dabigatran (Pradaxa) and rivaroxaban (Xarelto) to discontinue to avoid bleeding and epidural hematomas and are continued during interventional
techniques to avoid cerebrovascular and cardiovascular thromboembolic events.

The American Society of Regional Anesthesia (ASRA) published a 2018 systematic review of fourteen articles for evidence regarding risks associated with either continuing or ceasing
anticoagulant and antiplatelet medication in patients having image-guided interventional spine procedures using GRADE methodology. Interlaminar procedures carried a greater risk
of hemorrhagic complications regardless of whether the anticoagulants were ceased or continued, while other procedures did not carry that risk and could be performed while
continuing anticoagulation. Three articles reported adverse effects of ceasing anticoagulants, with serious consequences, including death.43 However, this report was
limited to case studies, case series, several observational studies, one large retrospective study, and one large prospective study with broad heterogenicity, multiple different
neuraxial procedures included, and nonuniformed protocols making it difficult to draw clear conclusions.

A summary of current literature supports that withholding anticoagulation medication to reduce the risk of major bleeding such as hematoma from ESIs may increase the risk of
thromboembolic events. A 2015 review concludes, “the decision should be considered in the context of a clear understanding of the patient’s anatomy, established guidelines and the
perspectives of the patient and prescriber of the anticoagulation medication(s).”1

The SME panel agreed on the absolute contraindications included in the LCD with voting of three to five for each of the listed contraindications. However, the panel had low confidence
score 2/5 (range 1-4) that the evidence supports the continuation of anticoagulation for epidural injections. The wide range demonstrates the continued controversy which is not
resolved among variations in societal guidance.

Image Guidance procedures

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
The use of imaging during the performance of ESI’s is considered standard. A 2016 systematic review to determine the effectiveness and risks of non-image-guided lumbar
interlaminar epidural steroid injections reviewed 92 primary publications using GRADE methodology and concluded that these procedures should be performed with image
guidance and procedures without imaging should be restricted to the rare settings where fluoroscopy is not available.13 A 2015 multi-disciplinary workgroup to improve the safety of
epidural steroid injections included a recommendation that all cervical and lumbar interlaminar ESIs should be performed with image guidance plus a test dose of contrast
medium. They further state that cervical and lumbar TFESIs should be performed by injecting contrast medium under real-time fluoroscopy or digital subtraction imaging.14
Multiple other societies also endorse imaging requirements for ESI’s. The North American
Spine Society (NASS) Choosing Wisely recommendations include “Elective spinal injections, such as epidural steroid injections, should be performed under imaging guidance using
fluoroscopy or CT with contrast enhancement (unless contraindicated) to ensure correct placement of the needle and to maximize diagnostic accuracy and therapeutic
efficacy." 46 The NASS published guidelines suggest that while there is some evidence to support ultrasound-guided lumbar TFESI, this data is limited and, due to the risk of serious
complications with ESIs, it is not considered standard care. 47,48

Evaluation of success

Once an ESI is performed, the patient must be assessed to determine if the injection was successful. This requires a clear definition of success. Success should include a reduction in
pain symptoms and/or as improvement in function. Most research protocols studying the efficacy of ESIs used the Oswestry Low Back Pain Disability Questionnaire (ODQ) or Roland-
Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ) to measure function, Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) or
Numerical Rating Score (NRS) to measure pain, and a variety of questionnaires to measure the quality of life, depression, and other outcomes. Most studies used a threshold of 50%
improvement from baseline to consider the ESI successful. While questionnaires may be burdensome in clinical practice, a standard measure for improvement is important to
determine if the treatment is effective. Further research for simple assessment tools is needed.

A 2020 prospective observational study for sixteen patients >65 years old with symptomatic lumbar stenosis with radiculopathy who selected IESI, or medical management were
followed with the Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) and numeric pain score. The SPPB score includes a 4-meter walk test, chair stand time, and balance score. There was
statistically significant improvement reported in SPPB score at one month for the injection group, but not in the medication group. Most studies on ESIs use metrics that include
improvement in pain scores and/or questionnaires. There are few studies that measure functional outcomes. The RMDQ is a validated measure of disability and patient-reported
function but does not include objective or observable measures. This study, while too small

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
in number for conclusive results, offers a functional parameter to measure improvement after ESI, stating the SPPB is a quick and feasible screening tool. They state, “The SPPB is
an easy-to-use tool to measure changes in physical function in older adults and could easily be integrated into the outpatient pain clinic setting. Even a 1-point change in an SPPB score
and its subsets is clinically meaningful and correlates with decreased mortality and disability.” 49

Success may also be defined as avoidance of surgery. A small double-blinded randomized controlled trial (RCT) looked at twenty-one patients previously identified as operative
candidates who delayed surgery; and underwent ESIs. Seventeen of the twenty-one did not undergo operative intervention at the five-year mark. The authors concluded that injections
can avoid operative intervention.50 Limitations are the very small sample size and risk of selection bias. Throughout the evidence review below there are studies which do not show a
reduction in need for surgery, while others demonstrate a trend in reduction of surgical management, with no moderate or high-quality literature to confirm this observation.

The SMEs were asked about their confidence that the clinical literature supports that ESIs provided at least 50% pain relief and voted 3/5 (range 1-5). The panel expressed high
confidence in using a measure of function for ESIs success with a score of 4/5; range 2-5.
The panel discussed that a clinical success must be a combination of both improvement in pain and/or function and that standardized scales used in the setting of research may not be
practical for clinical practice. The panel does acknowledge the need for some standardized measurement of successful outcomes of the procedures.

Multi-modality approach

A 2014 Cochrane review on multidisciplinary biopsychosocial rehabilitation (MBR) for chronic low back pain included forty-one randomized controlled trials (n=6858). It concluded
there is moderate-quality evidence that patients with chronic low back pain receiving MBR are likely to experience less pain and disability than those receiving usual care or physical
treatment. They also correlated a positive influence on work status. 10

The ASA Task Force of Pain Management recommends ESIs with or without local anesthetic as part of a multimodal treatment regime to provide pain relief in selected patients with
radicular pain or radiculopathy.

Lumbosacral radicular pain

The effectiveness of ESIs has been a source of controversy. Multiple studies and systematic reviews reported favorable results, but several reports offered conflicting evidence. A 1997
RCT published in the New England Journal of Medicine with 158 patients with disc herniation and pain were randomized to ESI with glucocorticoid or placebo. At three weeks,
the Oswestry score had improved by a mean of -8.0 in the methylprednisolone group and

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
-5.5 in the placebo group (95 percent confidence interval for the difference, -7.1 to 2.2), there was an improvement in leg pain in the steroid group at six weeks, but no significant
difference between the groups at three months. At 12 months, the cumulative probability of back surgery was 25.8 percent in the methylprednisolone group and 24.8 percent in the
placebo group (P = 0.90). They concluded there was short-term improvement from ESIs for herniated disc but without significant functional benefits or reduction in the need for
surgery. 51 In 2015, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) released a technology report consisting of a systematic review of RCT of patients with lumbosacral
radiculopathy, spinal stenosis, non-radicular back pain, or chronic post-surgical back pain.
Quality of evidence was assessed for risk of bias using Cochrane Back Review Group criteria. Meta-analysis was performed and stratified by time. Seventy-nine RCTs of ESIs
were included. Thirty placebo-controlled trials evaluated epidural corticosteroid injections for radiculopathy. For radiculopathy, epidural corticosteroids were associated with a greater
immediate-term reduction in pain (weighted mean difference on a scale of 0 to 100, -7.55 [95% CI, -11.4 to -3.74]; strength of evidence [SOE], moderate), function (standardized mean
difference after exclusion of an outlier trial, -0.33 [CI, -0.56 to -0.09]; SOE, low), and short- term surgery risk (relative risk, 0.62 [CI, 0.41 to 0.92]; SOE, low). For ESIs compared to
placebo, they concluded that the magnitude of effects on pain and function was small. They did not meet predefined thresholds for minimum clinically important differences, lacked
longer-term benefit, and did not demonstrate effectiveness (SOE: insufficient to low). The authors concluded that corticosteroid injections for radiculopathy were associated with
immediate but short-term benefits and did not reduce the long-term risk of surgery.
Limitations of this paper included methodological shortcomings of the RCTs evaluated.52

A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis included RCTs comparing TFESI with steroids (with or without local anesthetics [LA] to LA or saline in adults with lumbosacral radicular
pain secondary to herniated intervertebral discs. They reviewed data on numerical rating scale scores for pain, validated scores for measuring physical disability and quality of life,
and incidence of surgery measured at one month to two years after the interventions were meta-analyzed. Evidence was rated with GRADE. Eight studies were included, including 771
patients (336 in steroid group and 405 in the comparator group). They concluded that TFESI has no impact on physical disability or incidence of surgery. They reported the following:

Patients who received TFESI steroids reported a significant, but clinically modest, reduction in mean pain scores (0-10 scale) compared with LA/saline (-0.97 points; 95%
confidence interval, -1.42 to -0.51 points; P < 0.0001, I² = 90%; GRADE weak recommendation; moderate-quality evidence) at three months after the interventions.
The TFESI with steroids did not decrease physical disability at one to three months after the intervention (GRADE strong recommendation; high-quality evidence)
The TFESI did not decrease the incidence of surgery at twelve months after the intervention (GRADE strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence) compared

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
with LA/saline.
The TFESI steroids provide modest analgesic benefit at three months in patients with lumbosacral radicular pain secondary to herniated intervertebral disks

Limitations were the high degree of heterogeneity among the publications included in this meta-analysis. 53

In the same year, a systematic review of 52 RCTs with placebo control or active-control design looked at the efficacy of ESIs in the management of chronic spinal pain. The quality
of each article was assessed by Cochrane review criteria, as well as the Interventional Pain
Management Techniques-Quality Appraisal of Reliability and Risk of Bias Assessment (IPM- QRB). The authors concluded there was Level II evidence for managing lumbar disc
herniation or radiculitis for long-term improvement either with caudal, interlaminar, or transforaminal epidural injections with no significant difference in approaches. They
challenged the methodology of the contrasting report and stated the limitations are the paucity of high-quality randomized trials literature which continues to confound the
evidence.54

A 2016 comparative systematic review and meta-analysis included thirty-nine randomized controlled trials that compared the efficacy of ESIs for lumbar and spinal stenosis performed
with saline with steroids, local anesthetic alone, or steroids with a local anesthetic. The review included nine placebo-controlled trials evaluating ESIs, either with sodium chloride
solution or bupivacaine, compared to placebo injection, and twelve studies comparing local anesthetic alone to local anesthetic with steroid. The meta-analysis of five studies utilizing
sodium chloride or bupivacaine with steroid showed a lack of efficacy. Comparing lidocaine to lidocaine with steroids in seven studies showed significant effectiveness from baseline to
long-term follow-up, which was considered three months. Meta-analysis showed similar effectiveness for pain and function without non-inferiority of lidocaine compared to lidocaine
with steroid at three months and twelve months. The duration of follow-up varied among the included trials with a minimum of three months, so the twelve-month outcome data
were from the limited number of trials extended for that duration. They concluded ESIs for radiculopathy or spinal stenosis with sodium chloride solution or bupivacaine were shown to
be ineffective. Lidocaine alone or lidocaine in conjunction with steroids was significantly effective.55

A 2017 systematic review and a meta-analysis using GRADE methodology evaluated seventy-one publications, including observational and RCTs addressing fluoroscopically
guided lumbar interlaminar epidural steroid injections to determine the effectiveness and risk of a variety of etiologies, including lumbar radiculopathy. They evaluated the body of
literature for specific underlying etiologies. They reported most evidence regarding lumbar ILESI was observational and low quality. They concluded radicular pain due to lumbar disc
herniation provides a statistically significant short-term improvement in pain.16 A 2019

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
Korean review using GRADE concluded a high level of evidence [LoE] for ESI for radicular pain with the strength of recommendation [SoR] as strong. They favored TFESI over ILESI
(LoE : moderate, SoR: weak and CESI (LoE:moderate, SoR: strong).26

Few studies address long-term outcomes, with most going to twelve months as the longest duration. A 2018 prospective cohort study contacted patients who had received single-level
lumbar TFESIs for herniated nucleus pulposus to evaluate long-term outcomes. Of the original 78 patients enrolled, they could contact 39 (50%) at five years for follow-up. They
found that despite a high success rate at six months, most subjects experienced a recurrence of symptoms at some time during the subsequent five years. This concludes that
lumbar disc herniation is a disease that can be effectively treated in the short-term by TFESI or surgery, but long-term recurrence rates are high regardless of treatment received.56

In 2020, a Cochrane Database Systematic Review reported twenty-five clinical trials with 2470 participants, comparing epidural corticosteroid injections to placebo for lumbosacral
radicular pain. Using GRADE methodology, eight trials were considered high quality. 57 They report the overall body of literature ranged from very low to moderate. The study concludes
there is limited evidence for the use of ESIs in people with lumbosacral radicular pain as the treatment effects are small, mainly evident at short-term follow-up, and may not be
considered clinically important by patients and clinicians (i.e., mean difference lower than 10%). No minor or major adverse events were reported at short-term follow-up. The report
limitations included insufficient information on how or when adverse events were assessed for immediate and long-term follow-up.

Key findings reported include:

The ESIs were probably slightly more effective compared to placebo in reducing leg pain at short-term follow-up (mean difference [MD] -4.93, 95% confidence interval [CI] -8.77
to -1.09 on a 0 to 100 scale; 8 trials, n = 949; moderate-quality evidence [downgraded for risk of bias]).
For disability, epidural corticosteroid injections were probably slightly more effective compared to placebo in reducing disability at short-term follow-up (MD -4.18, 95% CI
-6.04 to -2.17, on a 0 to 100 scale; 12 trials, n = 1367; moderate-quality evidence [downgraded for risk of bias]).
The treatment effects are small, however, and may not be considered clinically important by patients and clinicians (i.e., MD lower than 10%).
There is uncertain evidence if ESI makes no difference compared to placebo injection in the frequency of minor adverse events (risk ratio [RR] 1.14, 95% CI 0.91 to 1.42; 8 trials,
n = 877; very low-quality evidence [downgraded for risk of bias, inconsistency, and imprecision]).

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
A 2020 systematic review by Smith et al. evaluated the effectiveness of lumbar transforaminal injection of steroid for the treatment of radicular pain. This review used
GRADE methodology and reviewed thirty-two observational cohort studies, nine pragmatic trials, and two explanatory trials published between 1997-2017. Using a reduction of pain
of =50%, the authors reported the success rate across the included studies. They reported a success rate for disc herniations of 63%, 74%, 64% and 64%, at one, three, six, and twelve
months respectively. The authors stated high-quality evidence for the effectiveness of TFESI, based on outcomes of multiple randomized control trials and high-quality observational
studies. Most studies in this review showed treatment benefits lasting three to six months, with some studies suggesting benefits at one or even two years post-injection. However,
they attribute the one to two-year benefit likely related to the natural history of lumbar radicular pain rather than a direct effect of the corticosteroids. One of the challenges with
this body of literature is that the follow-up interval is highly variable among the studies, and co-interventions are prominent, so it is difficult to determine the true durability of the
intervention. The literature reviewed showed a trend towards a reduction in surgery in patients who reported success with ESIs.58

While the overall clinical experience of the SMEs leaned towards a reduction in surgery with the use of ESIs they agreed this was not consistently reproduced in the literature with a
score of 2/5 (range 2-5). Overall, the panel felt that there was some evidence to support that ESIs reduced the need for opiates with a score of 3/5 (range 1-4), however studies to
specifically address this are lacking.

Lumbar Spinal Stenosis

The evidence surrounding the use of ESIs for lumbosacral spinal stenosis is conflicting. A 2014 double-blind, multisite, randomized controlled trial funded by the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality reported on 400 patients with lumbar central spinal stenosis with moderate to severe pain (>4/10 at baseline) and a disability score of 7 or
higher on the RMDQ to receive ESI with glucocorticoids plus lidocaine or lidocaine alone. The patients received one or two injections and evaluation at six weeks from the first injection.
At six weeks, there was no significant difference between the groups RMDQ scores (adjusted difference in the average treatment effect between the glucocorticoid–lidocaine
group and the lidocaine-alone group, -1.0 points; 95% confidence interval [CI], -2.1 to 0.1; P = 0.07) or leg pain scores (adjusted difference in the average treatment effect, -0.2 points;
95% CI, -0.8 to 0.4; P = 0.48). They concluded ESI with LA and glucocorticoids offered minimal or no short-term benefit compared to ESI with LA alone.59 This was met by support
for surgical management or trial of conservative measures for lumbar spinal stenosis and criticism from members of the interventional pain management community.60 A 2015
systematic review and meta-analysis, including eight trials on ESIs for spinal stenosis, concludes there were no clear effects of ESIs for spinal stenosis with the strength of
evidence rated low to moderate.52 The 2019 MIST Guidelines for lumbar spinal stenosis from

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
the minimally invasive spine treatment consensus group evaluated nine studies (2 randomized controlled trials [RCTs]; 7 observational studies, four prospective studies and
three retrospective studies) of minimally invasive spine treatments and reported there is
Level I evidence for percutaneous image-guided lumbar decompression as superior to lumbar ESIs. The consensus group developed treatment algorithms to guide management. 61

On the contrary, there are several papers that support the use of ESI for spinal stenosis. A two-year observational study on the use of TFESI for lumbar spinal stenosis followed 68
consecutive patients at six weeks, one and two years, to avoid decompressive surgery. Of these patients, thirty-two percent opted for surgery, 24% had repeat injections, and 44%
were satisfied with non-surgical management at two years. The authors conclude TFESI is a reasonable treatment for lumbar spinal stenosis, provides long-term relief in a high
proportion of patients, and can reduce the need for surgical management.62 There are prospective studies supporting this use.61 A 2015, double-blinded RCT compared the
effectiveness of lumbar ILESI with LA only to lumbar ILESI with corticosteroids and LA with central spinal stenosis. Assessments to measure success were defined as = 50% pain relief
at 3,6,12, 18, and 24 months. They reported 72% (95% CI: 61-83%) of patients receiving lidocaine and corticosteroids and 73% (95% CI: 62-85%) receiving lidocaine alone had
significant pain relief at 24 months; concluding ESI with LA with or without steroids were equally effective and beneficial.64 However, overlapping confidence intervals suggest the
treatments are equivalent at those timeframes, so it does not provide evidence for long-term improvement. In the 2015 systematic review of 52 RCTs with placebo control or active-
control design looking at the efficacy of epidural injections in managing chronic spinal pain, they concluded Level II evidence for caudal and lumbar interlaminar epidural injections with
Level III evidence for lumbar transforaminal epidural injections for lumbar spinal stenosis.
The evidence is Level II for cervical spinal stenosis management with an interlaminar approach.54

Even further conflicting papers support a short-term, but not long-term, benefit. A 2017 multicenter, double-blind, randomized controlled trial compared epidural injections of
corticosteroid plus lidocaine versus lidocaine for lumbar central spinal stenosis alone at sixteen clinical sites. Participants had the option of blinded crossover after six weeks to
receive the alternate treatment. Disability was measured using the RMDQ. The authors report at twelve months, both treatment groups maintained initial observed improvements,
with no significant differences between groups on the RMDQ (adjusted mean difference, -0.4; 95% confidence interval [CI], -1.6 to 0.9; P=.55), leg pain (adjusted mean difference,
0.1; 95% CI, -0.5 to 0.7; P=.75), opioid use (corticosteroid plus lidocaine: 41.4% vs lidocaine alone: 36.3%; P=.41), or spine surgery (corticosteroid plus lidocaine: 16.8% vs lidocaine
alone: 11.8%; P=.22). They did not observe a difference among participants who crossed over at six weeks. They conclude for lumbar spinal stenosis symptoms, epidural injections of
corticosteroid plus lidocaine offered no benefits from 6 weeks to 12 months beyond that of

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
injections of lidocaine alone in terms of self-reported pain and function or reduction in the use of opioids and spine surgery. However, in patients with improved pain and function six
weeks after the initial injection, these outcomes were maintained at 12 months. They did not receive additional benefits after three weeks based on the injectant type. Additionally, if
there was no improvement during the first six weeks, repeated injections of either type provided no added long-term benefit. 65 A 2017 systematic review and a meta-analysis
using GRADE methodology reported on four observational studies; one RCT concluded the evidence suggests a lack of effectiveness of lumbar ILESI in treating primary axial pain
related to spinal stenosis but does suggest significant short-term improvements in radicular pain with stenosis. 17

A 2019 meta-analysis reviewed non-surgical medical treatment in the management of pain due to lumbar disc prolapse. Fifty-eight studies in global effects and 74 studies in pain
intensity analysis were included, with 65.5% rated as high risk for bias. They found CESI and TFESI had higher short-term scores at follow-up while biologicals and manipulation had a
higher score at long-term follow-up for pain intensity; however, no treatment was found to be superior when comparing multiple outcomes and periods. The TFESI was reported to be
an effective short-term treatment. They reported a lack of high-quality studies as a limitation.66,67

There is little evidence showing a benefit for long-term outcomes. A 2020 retrospective cohort of 54/90 patients who underwent TFESI for controlling lumbar spinal stenosis
induced radicular pain were interviewed at least five years after their initial procedure. Half of the patients were receiving repetitive TFESIs every two to six months or were taking oral
pain medication; 25% had undergone surgical intervention. The authors report poor long- term pain relief with surgery as well and conclude ESIs offer a safe option for controlling
radicular pain associated with spinal stenosis. 68

A 2020 prospective comparative analysis of cost and quality of life (QOL) compared lumbar ESIs to conservative management alone at three and six months. One hundred forty-one
patients were included, and the authors concluded at three months, ESIs provided similar improvements in QOL outcomes relative to medical management and at similar costs. At six
months, neither ESIs nor conservative management provided significant QOL outcomes.69

In the 2020 systematic review by Smith et al. for lumbar spinal stenosis, using a =50% pain relief criteria, the studies (range) reported success rates of 49% (43–55%) at one month,
48% (35–61%) at three months, 43% (33–53%) at six months, and 59% (45–73%) at one year. The author offers low-quality evidence according to GRADE methodology and notes
the lack of corroboration from appropriately controlled studies. 58

The MIST Guidelines on lumbar spinal stenosis consensus group concludes there is ample evidence to support the use of ESIs in the management of symptomatic lumbar spinal

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
stenosis. Depending on the duration and extent of relief, these options can be repeated or continued to more surgical treatment solutions (grade B, level II-2, Consensus strong).61

Overall, the SMEs overall felt there was evidence to support a benefit of ESIs for spinal stenosis voting 4/5 for lumbar central spinal stenosis (range 2-5), foraminal stenosis (range
1-5) and subarticular stenosis (range 1-5).

Herpes Zoster

Herpes zoster may lead to severe zoster-associated pain (ZAP) and post neuralgia pain (PNP) to the degree of interfering with activities of daily living. Several studies have explored
the role of ESIs in the management of ZAP. A 2017 retrospective review of 137 patients with ZAP who underwent TFESI for management of ZAP was included. They compared those
who had the TFESI within the first 30 days to those who had the procedure between 30-90 days. They concluded that early application of TFESIs in the acute phase was a useful option
to control ZAP-related pain. Those who received the injection earlier had a significantly shorter time to pain relief with a lower incidence of postherpetic neuralgia (PHN).6 This was
limited by the retrospective nature of the study, lack of control group, or comparison to other treatment options such as antivirals, topical analgesic, or pharmacological treatment. There
are several trials evaluating continuous epidural infusion for the management of ZAP, but no studies that compare infusion to injections.

The SMEs had low confidence voting 2/5 (range 1-3) that there is evidence to support the use of ESIs for postherpetic neuralgia and 3/5 (range 1-5) for acute herpes zoster associated
pain.

Cervicogenic headaches and Cervicobrachialgia

The CESI is considered by many interventional pain management specialists to be a reasonable option for patients who have failed conservative treatments for cervicogenic
headache. A 2014 review on CESI for cervicogenic headache found no RCTs, and two prospective studies, with thirty-six patients in the studies combined), that support a role of
CESI for this indication; however, there is a paucity of literature to support this indication.18

Cervicobrachial is used to describe pain in the neck radiating to the arm due to nerve root compression typically caused by disc herniation or spinal stenosis. A non-controlled
randomized trial in 1993 on CESI for cervicobrachialgia randomized twenty-five patients to CESI and seventeen to steroid/lidocaine injection into the posterior neck muscles with one to
three injections at two-week intervals and followed them for one year. One week after the last injection, they found that pain relief was rated as very good and good in 76% of the
patients in the CESI group, compared to 35.5% of the patients in the posterior neck muscle injection group.70

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
The SMEs voted 3/5 (range 1-5) that there is evidence to support the use of ESIs for cervicogenic headaches and 4/5 (range 1-5) for cervicobrachialgia. The SMEs indicated that
cervicobrachialgia is caused by disc herniation and spinal stenosis, where ESIs are beneficial.

Non-Specific Back Pain

There is a lack of literature on the use of ESIs for non-specific low back pain. Most of the literature for non-specific pain support exercise therapy and multi-modality conservative
treatments. A 2017 systematic review reported on 71 publications addressing lumbar ILESIs regardless of etiology. They found low- quality evidence using GRADE methodology and
concluded lack of effectiveness of lumbar IESIs for treatment of primary axial pain regardless of etiology. They report that most studies on radicular pain due to lumbar disc
herniation and stenosis reports statistically significant short-term improvement. 17

The SMEs voted not confident 1/5 (range 1-2) that there is evidence to support the use of ESIs for non-specific back pain, widespread diffuse back pain, and non-organic back pain.

Post-surgical back pain

A 2018 systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials comparing outcomes of epidural steroids versus placebo after lumbar discectomy in lumbar disc
herniation reported on 12 studies with 1006 patients (502 in ESI group and 504 in placebo group) and found an unstandardized mean difference of VAS of back pain at 1 week and 1
month, leg pain at 1 week and 1 month, morphine consumption and hospital stay was - 0.53 (95% CI - 1.42, 0.36) score, - 0.89 (95% CI - 1.36, - 0.42) score, - 0.63 (95% CI - 0.75, - 0.50)
score, - 0.47 (95% CI - 0.78, - 0.15) score, - 8.47 (95% CI - 16.16, - 0.78) mg and - 0.89 (95% CI - 1.49, - 0.30) days lower when compared to placebo after lumbar discectomy in patients
with lumbar disc herniation. Ten studies compared complications and found no significant difference between the two groups (0.92; 95% CI 0.47, 1.83), and reported no significant
difference in complications for ES application after lumbar discectomy in lumbar disc herniation.71

A 2018 case-controlled series of sixty patients by Akbas et al. compared the three different approaches (TFESI, CESI, IESI) for post lumbar surgery syndrome and concluded that VAS,
OSW, and patient satisfaction scores were comparable across the three groups at all time intervals (P > 0.05), relative to baseline, there were significant decreases in pain relief scores
(VAS and OSW) and functional assessment expressed by patients’ satisfaction across all time intervals and in all three groups (P < 0.01).70

A 2020 systematic review by Smith et al. states a paucity of literature for TFESI for failed back surgery syndrome.58

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
The SMEs voted 3/5 (range 1-5) that there is evidence to support the use of ESIs for post - laminectomy pain syndrome.

Cervical Radicular Pain

Intervertebral disc-related pain can be caused by disc degeneration or herniation in the cervical spine region. Cervical disc herniation is a common source of cervical radicular pain.
The natural history of this condition is spontaneous resolution overtime. The NASS Guidelines from 2011 reported 43% of patients’ symptoms resolve in the first few months of
experiencing mild or intermittent symptoms, and 27% continue to have chronic pain.73 Safety issues associated with cervical epidural injections include the risk of spinal
cord injury, vascular injury, spinal infarct, and ischemia. Cervical TFESI has been associated with a higher risk of neurovascular complication and possible infarction off the spinal cord,
brain stem, cerebrum, or the cerebellum. The interlaminar technique is associated with increased risk of direct trauma to the spinal cord. 16

A 2015 systematic review reports on the long-term efficacy of cervical ILESI and TFESI to treat neck pain. Seven manuscripts between 1966-2014 using Interventional Pain
Management Techniques - Quality Appraisal of Reliability and Risk of Bias Assessment (IPM-QRB) methodology were included. There were four papers rated high quality, all
authored by the same author who was also the lead author on this systematic review. They reported Level II evidence for the efficacy of cervical interlaminar epidural injections with
local anesthetic with or without steroids, based on at least one high-quality relevant randomized control trial in each category for disc herniation, discogenic pain without facet
joint pain, central spinal stenosis, and post-surgery syndrome. 74 In the 2015 systematic review, also published by this group, on the efficacy of epidural injections for chronic spinal
pain, they rate the evidence Level II for long-term management of cervical disc herniation with ILESI, Level II for cervical spinal stenosis management with an interlaminar approach,
Level II for post cervical surgery syndrome treated with cervical ILESI, and Level II to III in managing thoracic disc herniation with an interlaminar approach.54 These systematic
reviews rated a higher level of evidence than an earlier review on the same subject with overlapping authors but using a different methodology for the assessment of the literature,
and the literature was older,75 but similar to the 2021 consensus reports from ASIPP Guidelines for methodology.76

A 2014 multi-centered RCT of 169 patients with cervical radicular pain compared ESIs, conservative treatment, or combination treatment for cervical radicular pain over six months.
Conservative treatment was pharmacotherapy with gabapentin and/or nortriptyline, and PT, as indicated, and combination therapy was ESI and pharmacotherapy with gabapentin
and/or nortriptyline plus PT. At one-month, arm pain scores were 3.5 (95% CI, 2.8 to 4.2) in the combination group, 4.2 (CI, 2.8 to 4.2) in ESI patients, and 4.3 (CI, 2.8 to 4.2) in
individuals treated conservatively (P = 0.26). Combination group patients experienced a

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
mean reduction of -3.1 (95% CI, -3.8 to -2.3) in average arm pain at one month versus -1.8 (CI, -2.5 to -1.2) in the conservative group and -2.0 (CI, -2.7 to -1.3) in ESI patients (P =
0.035). For neck pain, a mean reduction of -2.2 (95% CI, -3.0 to -1.5) was noted in combination patients versus -1.2 (CI, -1.9 to -0.5) in conservative group patients and -1.1
(CI, -1.8 to -0.4) in those who received ESI; P = 0.064). Three-month post-treatment, 56.9% of patients treated with combination therapy experienced a positive outcome versus 26.8%
in the conservative group and 36.7% in ESI patients (P = 0.006). The authors reported a lack of significant difference between the groups, with the combination therapy providing better
improvement. These results support an interdisciplinary approach to neck pain may improve outcomes; confirmatory studies are needed.77

A 2014 prospective observational study of 143 patients who received cervical para-midline interlaminar ESIs reported initial improvements at two weeks in 115 of 143 patients (80.8
%). Patients with paresthesia only and no pain showed significantly fewer improvements after ESIs (11/19, 57.9 %) than patients with pain (104/124, 83.9 %) (p=0.013). The authors
conclude that fluoroscopic para-midline ILESIs can effectively manage cervical radiculopathy, irrespective of the cause or zone of nerve root compression, and patients with
paresthesia only experienced fewer improvements. 78

A 2018 randomized trial compared cervical interlaminar epidural injections in post-surgery syndrome with LA with steroids to LA alone using a = 50% improvement on numerical rating
scale and functional status improvement using the Neck Disability Index (NCI). The authors report similar improvements in both groups, with 69% of patients receiving LA and 71% of
subjects receiving LA and steroids showing significant improvement at the end of two years.
They report an average number of procedures of five to six with an approximate 12 weeks of significant improvement per procedure. Limitations of the study were multiple co-
interventions, and variability in the frequency and number of interventions, and lack of true control group.79

A 2020 systematic review and meta-analysis on the effectiveness of fluoroscopic guided cervical transforaminal epidural steroid injection for the treatment of radicular pain included
six randomized and eleven nonrandomized comparative studies with pain improvement at least 50% from baseline. Using GRADE methodology, they reported approximately 50% of
patients experienced = 50% pain reduction at short and intermediate-term follow-up.
However, they acknowledged the literature was very low quality according to GRADE criteria and the lack of existing studies with adequate control groups. 80

A 2020 systematic review and meta-analysis on the effectiveness of epidural injections with local anesthetic with or without steroids for management of chronic neck pain concluded
that similar pain relief and function were achieved between the two groups. This was limited by the lack of randomized controlled trials, lack of heterogenicity in the included studies with
only one group publishing on this topic, and lack of control groups within the RCTs. 81

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
A 2020 retrospective report on the proportion of patients requiring surgery after CESIs reported 11.2% of patients underwent surgery within six months of CESI, 14.5% by one
year, and 22.3% by five years. Patients with stenosis and herniation were more likely to undergo surgery than those with radiculopathy. They report repeat injections reduced risk
for subsequent surgery with a mean of 1.7 to 5.5 injections in follow-up over two years. The study is limited by its retrospective nature, varying numbers of repeat injections and duration
of time between injections, and lack of specific indications for injections or subsequent surgery or surgical candidacy. It is difficult to conclude that the steroid injections reduce the
risk for subsequent surgery as the natural disease course points towards improvement alone.82

Multiple papers review the safety concerns surrounding cervical ESIs. The risk of spinal cord injury increases as the epidural space narrows moving cranially, so many authors and
recommendations conclude that cervical injections should be restricted to C6-C7 or C7-T1.
Additional safety measures include a review of pre-procedural imaging and avoiding particulate steroids in cervical injections. 1,14 A report addressing key safety issues states,
“overall cervical and tho­racic transforaminal epidurals constitute 2.4% of all epidural injections and less than 5% of all transforaminal epidural injections; however, they
contribute to over 99% of the complica­tions related to intra-arterial injection of partic­ulate steroids” and recommends against the use of cervical TFESI injections.32

The subject matter expert panel was asked their confidence for evidence to support cervical ESIs and they voted 4/5 (range 1-5).

Thoracic Epidural Injections

A 2012 systematic review of thoracic ILESI used the United States Preventive Task Force (USPTF) rating of evidence methodology and reviewed two studies, one RCT and one
observational study. The review concluded the evidence for thoracic epidural injection treating chronic thoracic pain is considered fair and limited for post-thoracotomy pain.83 The
USPTF grading has been revised since 2012, but at that time fair was considered sufficient evidence to determine the effect on health outcome, but the strength of evidence was
limited, and limited/poor was insufficient evidence to assess.

A 2014 RCT without a placebo group with 110 patients was randomized to two groups; one group received LA (n=55) and the other group LA with steroids (n=55). They reported most
patients had five to six procedures over two years and reported improvement in 71% in LA alone and 80% in LA plus steroids. Limitations included lack of placebo group and variability
in timing and number of procedures. 84

The SME panel voted 4/5 (range 2-5) that the evidence supports the benefits of ESIs outweighs risk for thoracic radicular pain. The panel discussed that thoracic radicular pain is
far less common and has not been well studied.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)

Frequency, laterality, and multiple level injections

Existing evidence and societal guidance support conservative management for acute back pain. There is little data regarding the frequency of ESIs for patients who are candidates for
intervention. A 2018 prospective cohort study of 102 patients who had ESI for radicular symptoms related to disc herniation (n=57) or cervical disc herniation (n=45) and had a
second injection administered for persistent pain were followed for one year. Seventeen patients had a second injection for lumbar herniation (29.8%) and seven for cervical
herniation (15.6%) at a mean of 65.3 days (SD 46.5) and 47 days (SD 37.2), respectively. All but one patient who had surgery responded satisfactorily with a mean VAS for leg pain of
8.8 mm (SD 10.3) and a mean VAS for arm pain of 6.3 mm (SD 9) one year after the second injection, respectively. They concluded repeat injections were acceptable treatment in
symptomatic patients without satisfactory relief after the first injection.85 Limitations of this study conducted in Europe were different standards for ESI and repeat injection, risk of recall
bias, and varying times to the second injection. In a study by the same authors, 1002 consecutive patients were prospectively assessed on short-term response to ESIs for various
indications. They determined ten-day outcomes of the second injection were as good as the outcome of the primary injection for a lumbar herniation: (72.2% better, 24.7% the same,
and 3.1% worse following 295 primary injections compared with 70.1% better, 24.8% the same and 5.1% worse after 117 second injections; p = 0.593). For cervical herniation, the
improvement was reported in 63.1%, the same in 28.6%, and worse in 8.3% after 84 primary injections compared with 52.2% better, 34.8% the same, and 13% worse after 23
second injections; p = 0.602). This study was also a European population and did not use validated outcome scores. 86 Other studies have also reported improvements with second
injections, but high variability in timing and number of injections and inclusion of other spinal procedures challenge interpretation. A 2016 prospective observational study included 184
patients who underwent TFESI for axial neck or radicular arm pain due to herniated disc or spinal stenosis. A group of partial responders (n=108) was scheduled to undergo repeat
injection at two-three weeks. The other group (n=76) of partial responders received repeat injections for aggravation of pain. They concluded the scheduled repeat injection group
showed a significantly longer time to reinjection and improved clinical benefits.67 This was limited by a lack of a control group, lack of standardization in the total number of injections,
and unclear randomization.

A 2014 retrospective observational study evaluated 933 patients with a total of 2,087 TFESI. Injections were repeated at intervals of at least two weeks for a duration of up to one
year from index injection. Of the total patients in the database (933/4,161) 22.4% received repeat injections during the study period, and the cohort showed a significant decrease in
improvement with subsequent injections (p=0.0311). This study is limited by retrospective design and high variability in the duration between injections and steroid preparations. They
found most patients did not require repeat injections for treatment of lumbar radicular pain

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
but did find those with an incomplete initial response who received early repeat injections within three months can achieve a cumulative benefit. 87

On the contrary, several authors reported no difference in long-term outcomes in patients receiving a second injection nor a reduction in the need for surgery.88,89 The 2005 WEST
study was a multicenter, double-blinded randomized placebo-controlled trial with 228 patients with sciatica. The patients were randomized to either three lumbar ESIs with steroid
or placebo (saline) at intervals of three weeks. At three weeks, they discovered that the ESI group had a transient benefit over the placebo group (75% improvement in ODQ, 12.5 vs.
3.7%; number needed to treat, 11.4). No benefit was demonstrated from 6 to 52 weeks.
They concluded that ESIs did not improve physical function, hasten return to work or reduce the need for surgery and did not find a benefit of repeated ESIs over single injection. They
advocate a multidisciplinary approach for management.90 Limitations were the use of 75% cut off for improvement while most studies use 50%, and assessment of disability but not
pain assessment.

A 2013 systematic analysis identified nine studies with = 50% pain relief after TFESIs for radicular pain after a single injection and reported 94% required a single injection and 4%
required a second injection to achieve this level of pain relief. The use of three or four injections was rare. 7

A 2014 retrospective observational study investigated if repeat lumbar TFESIs resulted in pain relief which has waned since index injection, and if a cumulative benefit could be
achieved by repeat injections within three months of the index injection. 4,161 patients received single-level TFESIs for radicular pain with or without radiculopathy. Between two
weeks and one year from index injection, 933 subjects (22.4%) had repeat injection within one year. The data indicates that 18% of subjects had two injections, 3.6% had three or
more injections. They concluded there was cumulative benefit of repeat injections within three months of the index injection.87 Limitations of the study included the retrospective
design, a high number of patients lost to follow up and no standardization in terms of timing of the repeat injection(s).

Using quality assurance databases from radiology and two medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) practices, 16,638 consecutive procedures in all spine segments (14,956 TFESI; 1,682
ILESI) were evaluated for major and minor adverse safety outcomes. The most frequent complication was a vasovagal reaction in 1.2% and dural puncture in 0.06%. They reported
no major adverse reactions, no long-term sequelae from any intermediate or delayed minor adverse events. They concluded both TFESI and IESI are safely performed with low
immediate and delayed adverse event rates when informed by evidence-based procedural guidelines. Of note, multiple patients in this population had bilateral procedures or two-level
injections without additional safety concerns.34

A 2016 study was conducted for 184 patients who underwent TFESI for axial neck and radicular arm pain with single ESI. Group A (n=108) was comprised of partial responders

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
defined as a numerical rating scale =3 and received scheduled repeat injections at two to three weeks after the first injection. Group B (n=76) was comprised of partial responders
who did not receive a repeat injection but received intermittent injections for aggravation of pain. Total number of injections within one year and NRS score <3 were recorded, and they
concluded Group A showed a significantly longer time to re-injection and a longer time between injections. The average number of injections was 2.48 in Group A, with four
patients receiving more than three injections and 2.98 in Group B with 16 patients receiving >3 injections. 91 This study is limited by retrospective design and selection bias as patients
who did not follow up for a year or choose surgery were excluded.

Subject matter experts were asked about their confidence that the evidence demonstrates ESIs provided relief for a minimum of six weeks after injection with score of 4/5 (range 1-5).

The panel was split regarding repeating ESIs if the initial treatment did not result in substantial pain relief with the majority feeling that repeating in a different level would
be appropriate (3/5; range 1-5), but not at the same level that did not achieve improvement with ESI.
When asked if there is literature on a safe or harmful number of ESIs per year SMEs voted no. There was not a consensus among the panel in terms of the number of
ESIs that would be considered safe or harmful in a twelve-month time period with a range of three-four in twelve months suggested.
In response to the question concerning the literature providing input on the safety of multiple levels of ESIs performed in the same session, 6 out of 11 voted no. When asked
the number of levels they felt would be safe the range was one to three per session.
Half (5/10) did not feel the literature provides input on a safe duration of time between the administration of separate ESIs in the same spinal region and the recommended
duration ranged from two weeks to three months. One SME stated, “the need for individual assessment and response to prior injections as well as goals of treatment
management versus resolution are factors that can influence this decision”.
Subject matter experts were asked about their level of confidence in the evidence to support repeat epidural injections for long-term management of chronic back pain >6
months and there was not a consensus. Comments included lack of supporting evidence for ESIs for chronic pain management. This must be balanced against patients
who do have good results with injections and wish to avoid surgery when clinical benefit is evident.

Injectants

Epidural steroid injections usually contain local anesthetic (LA) and glucocorticoids. The optimal combination and dosing have not been determined. The role of epidural nonsteroidal
injections remains controversial. A 2013 systematic review and meta-analysis looked at the control arm of forty-three studies which included saline, LA, and injections into muscle or

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
ligament (sham). In the indirect comparison, they concluded epidural non-steroidal injections achieved positive outcomes (risk ratio, 2.17; 95% CI, 1.87-2.53) and provided greater pain
reduction scores (mean difference, -0.15, 95% CI, -0.55 to 0.25). Indirect comparison does not qualify as the same level of evidence as a randomized comparison, and the study was
limited by only one included study being ranked as high quality using GRADE methodology and inadequate numbers to detect in effect by size, but suggest that the nonsteroidal
injections were not entirely placebo.92 A 2015 systematic review of RCTs using Cochrane review criteria and the American Society of Interventional Pain Physicians (ASIPP) criteria
for assessing interventional techniques looked at thirty-one trials seeking evidence on local anesthetics, saline, steroids, and other solutions. They conclude equal efficacy for local
anesthetic with steroids and local anesthetic alone in multiple spinal conditions. For disc herniation, they report superiority of local anesthetic with steroids over local anesthetic
alone.93 A 2021 systematic review of randomized control trials by Manchikanti et al.
compared sodium chloride solution alone, steroids alone, or sodium chloride solution with steroids in managing spine pain secondary to disc herniation or spinal stenosis. The authors
reported utilizing a single-arm analysis that both epidural saline and epidural steroids with saline were effective in reducing 20% of pain, however, only reducing disability score by 10
to 20%.94 Several 2020 systematic reviews and meta-analysis looking at the difference in efficacy between lidocaine alone versus lidocaine and steroids in the management of lumbar
disc herniation or spinal stenosis concluded there were similar effects associated with lidocaine alone or in combination with steroids. 95,96

This study contradicts multiple other studies that showed steroids were superior to saline or other placebos. The Friedly et al. multicenter, double-blinded randomized controlled trial
compared epidural injections of corticosteroids plus lidocaine versus lidocaine alone in 400 patients with confirmed spinal stenosis. In this study, patients had the option of blinded
crossover after six weeks to receive the alternate treatment. However, fewer participants randomized to corticosteroids plus lidocaine (30%, n=60) versus lidocaine alone (45%, n=90)
crossed over in six weeks (p=0.03) and 93% indicating a lack of effectiveness as a reason to cross-over. Using an intention to treat (ITT) analyses, a small, but consistent difference
favoring steroids plus LA over LA alone was observed. At twelve months there was no significant difference between the group. This study did not show repeat injections of either
type offering additional benefit if injections in the first six weeks did not improve pain.65 A systematic review by Bicket et al. evaluating control injections in RCTs reports that ESIs may
provide a benefit compared to non-ESIs while acknowledging this was based on few, low- quality studies directly comparing controlled treatment and short-term outcomes. However,
this review with 3,651 from 43 studies represents the largest analysis comparing ESI with a steroid to a nonsteroidal alternative including, LA alone, etanercept, saline, intramuscular or
ligamentous injections, and dry needling. The authors concluded the benefit from ESIs was limited but suggested it may not constitute a placebo effect. 92

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
While systematic reviews and meta-analysis have suggested a role in non-steroidal injections, these studies are limited because they rely on previously conducted randomized
control trials where the research question was not specific to determining the effectiveness of these non-steroid injections. The data set utilized is subject to significant heterogenicity (I2
>50-99%), variability of the patient population, and small sample sizes. Studies dedicated to the investigation of the non-steroid injections are necessary as well as studies with longer-
term follow-up periods to understand if there is a role for nonsteroidal injections in lieu of epidural steroid injections. There is not enough evidence to be confident that non steroid
injections are equally effective to steroid injections based on the current body of literature.

A 2016 study reported improvement in pain with particulate compared to non-particulate steroids.95 Spinal cord ischemia and posterior circulation infarction have been reported after
cervical ESIs. Concern arose that this risk was greater for particulate compared to non- particulate steroids prompting further investigations and recommendations. In 2011 the
FDA required a label change for triamcinolone stating it should not be used for ESI.96 A 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis comparing particulate steroids to non-particulate
counterparts conclude that particulate steroids are not better in relieving pain compared to their non-particulate counterparts but may offer an improved safety profile. They conclude
with the recommendation to consider switching to non-particulate steroids. 97 Another 2017 systematic review by Mehta et al. agreed concluding, no benefit to particulate steroids and
recommending non-particulate steroids with performing cervical TFESI, with Grade of Recommendation: B. For lumbar TFESI they state particulate vs. non-particulate as
equivocal with Grade of Recommendation: B for pain reduction and C for function with an overall recommendation for non-particulate steroids for lumbar TFESI.100

Steroid dosing, dilution, and additives are not standardized and are another area of controversy. There is evidence that different dilutions such as sodium chloride and local
anesthetic can alter the steroids particle size and distribution. There is concern about the toxicity of additives (such as benzyl alcohol and polyethylene glycol). (Based on the potential
risk associated with systemic corticosteroid absorption the WIP Benelux Workgroup recommends using the lowest effective dosing, which amounts to 40mg for
methylprednisolone acetate (MPA), 10-20mg for triamcinolone acetate, and 10mg (10mg/mL) for dexamethasone phosphate. They recommend limiting the cervical
interlaminar and lumbar transforaminal volume to 4mL and inject slowly. 16

Etanercept is a soluble p75 tumor necrosis factor fusion protein administered subcutaneously for inflammatory arthritis and other rheumatological conditions. While it has
been explored in several studies with preliminary positive results, it is not FDA approved for injection into the epidural space, and therefore is not considered medically reasonable and
necessary. Additional agents such as platelet-rich plasma, amniotic fluid, gabapentin, and others have been investigated, but there is not sufficient to evidence to support use and are
considered investigational.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)

Multiple procedures

Since injectants may have a bilateral effect or spread to adjacent levels, diagnostic interlaminar or caudal ESIs are seldom used. Diagnostic TFESIs are sometimes used to
determine the level of radicular nerve root pain to differentiate radicular from non-radicular pain, to evaluate a discrepancy between image studies and clinical findings, to identify the
source of pain in the prevalence of multi-level nerve root compression, and to help identify the level of pathology at a previous operative site. Selective spinal nerve blocks may also be
used to identify the source of pain. The cumulative steroid dose and long-term safety has not been studied in the setting of multiple injections administered in the same session.

The SMEs were split in terms of multiple procedures during a single session, with half of the experts (6/11) voting that evidence supported the administration of ESIs at the same time as
other interventional procedures. However, there was no additional supporting literature provided, and others brought up the concern of lack of diagnostic specificity when multiple
procedures are performed in the same session.

Society Guidance

North American Spine Society (NASS)

The 2020 NASS Evidence-Based Clinical Guidelines for Multidisciplinary Spine Care:
Diagnosis & Treatment of Low Back Pain concludes that there is insufficient evidence to make a recommendation for or against the use of caudal or interlaminar epidural steroid
injections in patients with low back pain with Grade of Recommendation: I (good evidence for or against recommending intervention).15

The 2020 NASS Epidural Steroid Injections & Selective Spinal Blocks offers evidence-based coverage recommendations when possible and in the absence of strict evidence-based
criteria recommendations are based on multidisciplinary experience and expertise of the authors. Evidence in this coverage policy are not graded11:

ESIs can be performed to provide relief of radicular or referred pain when 2/4 are present: pain is severe enough to cause a degree of functional and/or vocational
impairment or disability; pain duration of at least 4 weeks, and/or inability to tolerate or failure to respond to 4 weeks of noninvasive care, objective findings of radiculopathy or
sclerotomal referred pain pattern are present and documented on examination, and advanced imaging (CT or magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) demonstrates a
correlative region of nerve involvement. Criteria for exemption of four week delay is moderate to severe pain with functional loss at work and/or home, pain unresponsive to
outpatient medical management, inability to tolerate non-surgical non injection care to a coexisting medical condition or severe pain or prior successful injection therapy for
same condition achieving greater than 50% relief.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
ESIs are contraindicated for axial or nonspecific pain without radiating pain, most cancer or strong clinical suspicion of cancer, infection and compression lesions of the
spinal cord, conus medullaris or cauda equina. Relative contraindications to the performance of ESIs may include coexisting medical conditions such as uncontrolled
bleeding disorders, poorly controlled diabetes (if corticosteroids are going to be used), immune system impairment, history of severe allergic reaction to components, etc. In
these situations, the risk/benefits of the procedure should be considered in the medical decision-making process.
Procedural based recommendations include the use of image guidance, ILESIs should not be performed above C7, injection of contrast media under real time fluoroscopy or
digital subtraction imaging, use of a non-particulate steroid with the exception of thoracic and cervical spine, extension tubing for provider safety, and appropriate
provider training.

Suggested frequency of ESIs were based on author's expert opinion included no more than 4 ESIs and/or SSNBs should be performed in a 6-month period of time, no more
than 6 ESIs and/or SSNBs should be performed in a 12-month period of time regardless of the number of levels, no more than 2 TFESIs should be performed at a single setting
(e.g., single level bilaterally or two levels), and for CESIs or ILESIs, only one level per session may be performed and NOT in conjunction with a TFESI injection.
Local anesthesia is sufficient for most cases. Occasional minimally to moderate conscious sedation is appropriate and if monitored anesthesia care is utilized the need
for such stations should be clearly documented in the medical record.

They report that studies found that most patients who respond to ESIs do so with 3 or less injections for a specific episode of back and radicular pain. They provide non-
evidence-based criteria for instances when they consider it medically appropriate to perform more than 3 injections. These circumstances include performance of SSNBs for
surgical planning after failed ESIs, the presence of new injuries after resolution of a prior conditions or after interval surgery since prior ESIs, prior injections were done without
fluoroscopy or were inaccurately placed, exacerbation of symptoms that responded well to prior ESIs, and patients who responded well to prior ESIs that are not surgical
candidates due to comorbid medical conditions.

US Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)/US Department of Defense19

The 2017 VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for Diagnosis and Treatment of Low Back Pain utilized GRADE methodology. The original guidelines were developed in 2007. In
2017 the literature was reviewed, and recommendations were added (New-added).
For the long-term reduction of radicular low back pain, non-radicular low back pain, or spinal stenosis, we recommend against offering spinal epidural steroid injections.
(Strong against | Reviewed, New-added)

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
For the very short-term effect (less than or equal to two weeks) of reduction of radicular low back pain, we suggest offering epidural steroid injection. (Weak for | Reviewed,
New-added)
For the treatment of low back pain, we suggest against offering intra-articular facet joint steroid injections. (Weak against | Reviewed, New-added)

American Society of Interventional Pain Physicians (ASIPP)

The ASIPP released updated 2021 Epidural Interventions in the Management of Chronic
Spinal Pain: American Society of Interventional Pain Physicians (ASIPP) Comprehensive Evidence-Based Guidelines.76 This extensive evidence synthesis utilized a modified
approach to the grading of evidence101 and a recommendations grade table published in the British Medical Journal in 2001. This grading system utilizes the type of study and the
number of studies. In contrast, the GRADE system, defined in definitions above and commonly used in guideline development, focuses on the quality of the studies with up or
downgrading based on methodology. The quality of each article was assessed by
Interventional Pain Management Techniques-Quality Appraisal of Reliability and Risk of
Bias Assessment (IPM-QRB). Recommendations were made based on the National
Guideline Clearing Extent Adherence to Trustworthy Standards instrument. While many of the recommendations were moderate to strong and based on Level I- II evidence paucity of
literature with many of these areas is based on one study.

Evidence:

Disc Herniation: Based on relevant, high-quality fluoroscopically guided epidural injections, with or without steroids, and results of previous systematic reviews, the
evidence is Level I for caudal ESIs, lumbar ILESIs, and lumbar TFESIs and cervical ILESIs with a strong recommendation for long term effectiveness.
For thoracic disc herniation, based on one relevant, high quality RCT of thoracic epidural with fluoroscopic guidance, with or without steroids, the evidence is Level II with
moderate to strong recommendation for long term effectiveness.
For spinal stenosis, the evidence is based on one high-quality RCT in each category. The evidence is level II-III for fluoroscopically guided caudal epidural injections with
moderate to strong recommendation and Level II for fluoroscopically guided lumbar and cervical interlaminar epidural injections with moderate to strong recommendation for
long-term effectiveness.
The evidence for lumber TFESIs is Level III-IV with moderate recommendation with fluoroscopically guided lumbar TFESIs for long term improvement.
For axial discogenic pain, the evidence without facet joint pain or sacroiliac joint pain in the lumbar, and cervical spine with fluoroscopically guided caudal, lumbar and cervical
ILESIs, based on one relevant high-quality RCT in each category is Level II with

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
moderate to strong recommendation for long-term improvement, with or without steroids.
The evidence for lumbar and cervical post-surgical syndrome based on one relevant high-quality RCT with fluoroscopic guidance for caudal and cervical ILESIs, with or
without steroids, is Level II with moderate to strong recommendation for long-term improvement.

The American College of Radiology (ACR), the American Society of Neuroradiology (ASNR), the American Society of Spine Radiology (ASSR), the Society of Interventional Radiology
(SIR), and the Society of Neurointerventional Surgery (SNIS)

ACR–ASNR–ASSR–SIR–SNIS Practice Parameter for the Performance of Image-Guided
Epidural Steroid Injection (2019) is a Collaborative guideline.

When an ESI is performed, success is defined as the achievement of significant pain relief, reduced disability, and/or improved quality of life. These should be measured by at
least one of the relevant and validated measurement tools, such as the ten-point numerical pain rating scale score or a visual analogue scale score (Roland-Morris Back
Pain score, Oswestry Disability Index, The Short Form (36) Health Survey, or similar outcome tool to measure pain, disability, and/or quality of life). It is generally accepted
that a minimum of 20% change in pain scores is clinically meaningful, based upon previous trials and FDA requirements.

They list the following absolute contraindications:

1. Coagulopathy not correctible | 2. Concurrent systemic infection | 3. Infectious spondylitis | 4. Acute spinal cord compression | 5. Myelopathy or cauda equina syndrome | 6. Inability to obtain informed consent | 7. Infection at the skin puncture site

They list the following relative contraindications:

1. Uncorrected anticoagulation therapy – ILESIs and TFESIs are considered intermediate- risk procedures with a moderate risk of bleeding
2. Hypersensitivity to administered agents – allergy to contrast may be treated with premedication with antihistamine agents or an alternative approach (such as using CT
guidance with air as the contrast medium may be considered).
3. Pregnancy – Although such interventions may be performed without image guidance in pregnant patients, there is a 30% rate of incorrect placement [106]. Other options
include MRI-guided injections and ultrasound-guided injections as image-guided

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
procedures have a significantly greater margin of safety and should be utilized when feasible
4. Hepatitis – When performing neuraxial blockade in hepatitis C patients, thrombocytopenia must be excluded in order to avoid hematoma formation and its
associated neurologic complications 5. Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus- Insulin-dependent diabetics are at risk of elevated blood
sugars after steroid injections 6. Congestive heart failure – The steroid may lead to fluid retention
7. Immunosuppressed state- Preprocedural antibiotics may be considered 8. Patient improving on medical and physical therapy | 9. Severe spinal canal stenosis | 10. No response to previous well-performed ESI
11. Complication to steroid therapy (Cushing’s etc.)

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)

The AHRQ 2015 Technology Assessment for Pain Management Injection Therapies for Low
Back Pain2

The 2015 AHRQ technology assessment played a pivotal role in epidural injection for pain. While this report has not been updated since 2015 due to loss of funding for this
project, this report remains significant as it was funded by AHRQ, so there was low-risk of outcome reporting bias and leads to questions regarding the effectiveness and utility
of ESIs for pain. The report includes a systematic review of RCTs of patients with lumbosacral radiculopathy, spinal stenosis, non-radicular back pain, or chronic post-
surgical back pain. Quality of evidence was assessed for risk of bias using the Cochrane
Back Review Group criteria. Meta-analysis was performed and stratified by time. A total of 79 RCTs of epidurals were included. The results were: “For ESIs versus placebo
interventions for radiculopathy, the only statistically significant effects were on mean improvement in pain at immediate-term follow-up (weighted mean difference [WMD]
7.55 on a 0 to 100 scale, 95% CI 11.4 to 3.74) (strength of evidence [SOE]: moderate), the mean improvement in function at immediate-term follow-up when an outlier trial
was excluded (standardized mean difference [SMD] 0.33, 95% CI 0.56 to 0.09) (SOE:
low), and risk of surgery at short-term follow-up (relative risk [RR] 0.62, 95% CI 0.41 to 0.92) (SOE: low). The magnitude of effects on pain and function was small, did not meet
predefined thresholds for minimum clinically important differences, and there were no differences in outcomes at longer-term follow-up. Evidence on effects of different
injection techniques, patient characteristics, or comparator interventions estimates was limited and did not show clear effects. Trials of epidural corticosteroid injections for
radiculopathy versus non-placebo interventions did not clearly demonstrate effectiveness (SOE: insufficient to low). Evidence was limited for epidural corticosteroid
injections versus placebo interventions for spinal stenosis (SOE: low to moderate) or

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
nonradicular back pain (SOE: low), but showed no differences in pain, function, or likelihood of surgery. Serious harm from injections were rare in randomized trials and
observational studies, but harm reporting was suboptimal (SOE: low).” The authors concluded that corticosteroid injections for radiculopathy were associated with
immediate but short-term benefits and did not reduce the long-term risk of surgery.
They also conclude that ESI is not effective for spinal stenosis or non-radicular back pain.

The American College of Physicians (ACP)

The American College of Physicians (ACP) created the Clinical Practice Guidelines for
Noninvasive Treatments for Acute, Subacute, and Chronic Low Back Pain (2017) using the ACP grading system methodology and based on published systematic reviews and
a systematic review of RCTs through April 2015 to develop the following recommendations25:
Recommendation 1: Given that most patients with acute or subacute low back pain improve over time regardless of treatment, clinicians and patients should select
nonpharmacologic treatment with superficial heat (moderate-quality evidence), massage, acupuncture, or spinal manipulation (low-quality evidence). If
pharmacologic treatment is desired, clinicians and patients should select nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or skeletal muscle relaxants (moderate-
quality evidence). (Grade: strong recommendation).
Recommendation 2: For patients with chronic low back pain, clinicians and patients should initially select nonpharmacologic treatment with exercise, multidisciplinary
rehabilitation, acupuncture, mindfulness-based stress reduction (moderate-quality evidence), tai chi, yoga, motor control exercise, progressive relaxation,
electromyography biofeedback, low-level laser therapy, operant therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, or spinal manipulation (low-quality evidence). (Grade: strong
recommendation).

This report was updated in 2017 with some changes in recommendations for initial pharmacological management, but other conclusions were relatively unchanged.102

American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA)

The American Society of Anesthesiologist Task Force developed Practice Guidelines for
Chronic Pain Management, which were last updated in 2010. At that time, they stated, “ESI, with or without local anesthetics, may be part of a multimodal treatment regimen
to provide pain relief in selected patients with radicular pain or radiculopathy. Shared decision-making regarding epidural steroid injections should include a specific
discussion of potential complications, particularly regarding the transforaminal approach. Transforaminal epidural injections should be performed with appropriate

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
image guidance to confirm correct needle position and spread of contrast before injecting a therapeutic substance; image guidance may be considered for interlaminar
epidural injections”.12

American Academy of Neurology (AAN)

The American Academy of Neurology (AAN) published a technology assessment and reported in March 2007 and reaffirmed in July 2010 on epidural steroid injections to treat
radicular lumbosacral pain.11,19 Their recommendations and conclusions include:

1. Epidural steroid injections may result in some improvement in radicular lumbosacral pain when determined between two and six weeks following the injection, compared to
control treatment (Level C, Class I–III evidence). The average magnitude of the effect is small, and the generalizability of the observation is limited by the small number of
studies, limited to highly selected patient populations, the few techniques and doses studied, and variable comparison treatments.
2. In general, epidural steroid injections for radicular lumbosacral pain have shown no impact on average impairment of function, on the need for surgery, or long-term pain
relief beyond three months. Their routine use for these indications is not recommended (Level B, Class I–III evidence).
3. Data on the use of epidural steroid injections to treat cervical radicular pain are inadequate to make any recommendation (Level U).

American Association of Neurological Surgeons (AANS) and the Congress of Neurological Surgeons (CNS)

The American Association of Neurological Surgeons and the Congress of Neurological Surgeons guidelines update for performance of fusion procedures for degenerative disease
of the lumbar spine reviewed injection therapies for low back pain in Part 13 of their guideline update and reported no new evidence that changes recommendations from their
original publication in a 2014 update.103 The guidelines were based on a review of literature through 2011 and focuses on three systematic reviews and an updated review of RCTs.
They conclude, “the medical literature continues to fail to support using lumbar epidural injections for long-term relief of chronic back pain without radiculopathy. There is limited
support for the use of lumbar epidural injections for short-term relief in selected patients with chronic back pain.”

Lumbar Epidural Steroid Injections: Grade C Lumbar epidural steroid injections (ESIs) are an option for the short-term relief of chronic low-back pain without radiculopathy in
patients with degenerative disease of the lumbar spine (Level III evidence).
Caudal ESIs are an option for decreasing low-back pain of greater than six weeks’ duration, without radiculopathy, in patients with degenerative disease of the lumbar
spine (Level III)

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
Spine Intervention Society (SIS)

The Spine Intervention Society (SIS) Patient Safety Committee published 2020 guidance on the frequency of epidural steroid injections8 :

After an ESI, a period of up to 14 days may be needed to assess the clinical response.
Systemic effects on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis may last three weeks or longer. These factors must be considered when determining if or when
another ESI is indicated.
There is no evidence to support the routine performance of a “series” of repeat injections without regard to the clinical response to an initial injection.
Two separate studies suggest that repeat injections may improve outcomes in patients with a partial response to a first (index) ESI. Repeat ESI at greater than two weeks and
less than one year from the index injection has also been shown to result in a statistically and clinically significant decrease in pain, and patients with acute to
subacute symptoms recover all prior benefit with a statistically significant cumulative benefit.

The American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, the European Society of
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Therapy, the American Academy of Pain Medicine, the
International Neuromodulation Society, the North American Neuromodulation Society, and the World Institute of Pain provided updated guidelines for Interventional Spine and Pain
Procedures in Patients on Antiplatelet and Anticoagulant Medications (Second Edition)103

This updated guideline addresses ‘Pain Procedures Classification According to the Potential Risk of Serious Bleeding’ and indicates:

Intermediate risk defined as patients with a high risk of bleeding (e.g., old age, history of bleeding tendency, concurrent uses of other anticoagulants/antiplatelets, liver cirrhosis
or advanced liver disease, and advanced renal disease) undergoing low- or intermediate-risk procedures should be treated as intermediate or high risk, respectively
includes: Interlaminar ESIs (cervical, lumbar, sacral and thoracic) Transforaminal ESIs (cervical, lumbar, sacral and thoracic).
Recommends review of radiological imaging prior to performance of the procedure to assess for central and foraminal stenosis, disk herniations that compromise canal
diameter, ligamentum flavum hypertrophy, epidural fibrosis, and previous surgical scarring, which can alter the level of procedural difficulty.
Provides summary and guidance for multiple drugs including aspirin, NSAIDs, coumadin, heparin, low molecular weight heparin, fibrinolytic agents, etc.

The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 27 provided guidelines for “Low back pain and sciatica” Assessment and management recommendations include:

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
Support use of epidural injections for acute and severe sciatica Recommends imaging if it may change future management, including consideration for
epidural or spinal surgery.

Analysis of Evidence (Rationale for Determination)
Epidural steroid injections are a common pain management procedure for use in acute and chronic back pain. There are many areas of controversy regarding ESIs. This controversy
was reflected among the subject matter expert panel, where the experts expressed broadly differing interpretations of the literature and opinions regarding the appropriate use of
epidural steroid injections. There is a body of literature of randomized controlled trials comparing ESIs to various placebos, including local anesthetic, saline, and sham procedures.
However, few new trials have been conducted in recent years to further address the questions and issues surrounding ESIs. Instead, there is a multitude of systematic reviews
and meta-analyses of the previously conducted RCTs. These reviews have produced divergent conclusions despite using a similar body of literature. Meta-analysis is limited as
there is a great deal of heterogenicity among the randomized control trials. Meta-analysis is to synthesize the effects of many different studies into one single effect, which can be a
powerful tool to expand the number of subjects and help to determine the real or true effect.
However, when heterogenicity is high, it may not be appropriate to pool the data as we cannot be certain there is a real or true effect behind the data. Single arm analysis is not
sufficient to resolve this limitation.

There is a lack of a well-defined control in the studies conducted on the effectiveness of ESI.
The SMEs did not agree on the definition of placebo with an extensive discussion surrounding the concept that local anesthetics, or even saline, are equally effective to
steroids and cannot be counted as a placebo. To further complicate there are multiple randomized controlled trials that showed inferiority of LA alone compared to LA with ESIs.
The lack of standardization among the studies, including the route of administration, the type of steroid used, what it is combined with (such as local anesthetic or saline), the
amount of steroid, type of needle used, the use of imaging, the indication for the procedure, the frequency of injections, and the comorbidities among the patient population create
additional challenges in interpreting the literature. There are a large number of variables that have not been adequately accounted for in the existing data. There is a paucity of evidence
addressing long-term effectiveness or quality of life outcomes. New studies specifically addressing these issues are limited, and most new reports are systematic reviews and not
specifically designed to answer these questions. For these reasons, we must critically assess the existing body of literature and focus on nationally accepted standards for the grading of
evidence to ensure consistency and transparency in the analysis of evidence. We also looked towards societal guidance and expert input to aid in decision-making regarding this policy.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
The natural disease course of lumbar radicular pain from disc herniation is acute pain that typically resolves spontaneously. While pain may be debilitating during this time, outcomes
are overall favorable. Conservative management may improve pain and function and is considered the standard of care in the acute phase. When pain persists past the acute
phase, overall outcomes are still favorable for improvement. The existing evidence was consistent for a short-term benefit of ESIs to reduce pain and improve function for patients
experiencing this type of pain and potentially reducing the need for surgery for a condition that may improve spontaneously with time. The continued use of ESIs past six months is not
well supported by the existing evidence. Most trials did not go past 12 months, and those trials that did investigate the past six months did not find consistent evidence of benefit for
epidural steroid injections in chronic management. While the evidence does not support the continued use of ESIs societal guidance and expert input identifies a subset of patients who
are not good candidates for surgery, or even unsuccessful with surgery, where ESIs may provide improvement in their function and quality of life.

In spinal stenosis, the natural disease may result in improvement over time. Still, in settings of long-term and chronic pain, spontaneous improvement is less likely due to the physical
impingement of the nerve involved in the stenosis. There is low-quality evidence to support the role of ESIs in the short-term management of spinal stenosis and a trend towards
improvement that may allow time for spontaneous improvement. There is no high-quality evidence showing a benefit for long-term outcomes. Societal guidance varies with
recommendations both in support and against use for spinal stenosis. Despite conflicting evidence, we agree with SMEs that patients in the setting of shared decision-making and
risk and benefit discussion can elect a trial of ESIs as recovery can occur in greater than half of the patients without surgery.

Evidence to support the use of ESIs in post-surgical back syndrome is limited. However, alternative treatment options in this patient group are also limited. For patients experiencing
chronic back pain, especially those with previous back surgery, multimodal therapy is an important aspect of comprehensive treatment. Despite weak evidence, we support shared
decision-making and risk and benefit discussion of ESIs as part of the treatment plan. In multimodal therapy, ESIs may play a role to optimize pain and function in this population but
should not be a sole treatment option.

There was insufficient evidence to support the use of ESIs for non-specific low back pain, complex regional pain syndrome, widespread diffuse pain, spondylolisthesis, pain from
neuropathy from other causes, or cervicogenic headaches. The subject matter experts were divided with some supporting use for these indications; however, with the lack of supporting
literature and controversy amongst the experts, we maintain that the use of ESIs in these conditions is not medically reasonable and necessary.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
Studies support that a single injection can relieve pain in appropriately selected patients.
This is consistent with the natural history of the disease course, which will result in spontaneous improvement over time. Repeat injections were necessary for a minority of
patients, about 20%, in the existing literature with less than 5% receiving more than three injections. National data confirms that the use of more than four injections is used less than
five percent of the time in the Medicare population Simultaneously, the literature is variable in terms of timing between injections with reported ranges of two to twelve weeks.
Observational data suggest a potential benefit of a shorter interval between injections of two to three weeks after initial injection, concluding that overall pain and number of
injections are reduced with this approach. This however must be balanced against the cumulative steroid exposure and not allowing enough time for treatment to be fully effective.
A series of injections is not supported by the literature and there is agreement for the same among the SMEs.

While there are outliers and differing opinions as demonstrated amongst the SMEs the existing evidence aligns with a maximum of -four injections in a year for most patients.
Additionally, the natural history of the diseases treated with ESIs would rarely involve more than one region. In review of national data less than 0.05% of ESI sessions involved more
than one region in the same session.

Regarding levels, no studies compared single injections to multi-level injections to understand if the second level truly improved pain and function. Existing data did not show
increased safety risk of a second-level, and almost no studies reported more than two levels in the same session. Because the drug is not localized with more tendency to spread, second
levels would not be indicated for the caudal or interlaminar routes.

Epidural steroid injections have played a role in pain management for a long time. While there is controversy on their role in back and neck pain management, it is established that
patients have benefited at least in the short term to improve pain and function. Existing evidence does not support that ESIs result in long term improvement but rather provide pain
relief to allow time for the natural disease course to result in improvement. This may reduce the need for opiates and surgery in patients suffering from extreme pain and dysfunction
who would not be able to wait for the improvement through conservative modalities. While the risk of adverse outcomes associated with ESIs is rare, they can be serious; therefore,
appropriate use is critical. Little evidence exists to support the use of epidural steroids over the long term as the existing data largely demonstrates a benefit in the short term, (less
than six months), management of back and neck pain. Also, continued use of steroids over the long term may exacerbate underlying medical conditions, with an increased risk for
osteoporosis and fracture. Each intervention also carries the risk of complications, and radiation exposure potentially causes more harm than good. Based on our subject matter
expert input, there is an understanding that there are unique circumstances where a patient

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
is not a good surgical candidate or strongly opposes surgery. This may provide an option for pain and function relief and improved quality of life.

For this reason, the use of ESIs beyond one year must be combined with multimodal therapy, which has been shown to optimize outcomes by treating pain through a variety of
modalities. For any patient continuing to need epidural steroid injections beyond a year, evaluation of alternative treatment options and the risk and benefit of continued use are an
important aspect of care. The involvement of the patient's entire medical team, including primary care physicians who manage other underlying diseases and understand the
procedure’s impact on other health outcomes, should play a role in the risk and benefit discussion.

There is a lack of standardization in the use of ESIs, including the approach to the injection, type of injection, amount of injectant, duration of time and criteria for repeat injection would
be considered, indications for injections, and measurements of outcomes. Subject matter experts and societal guidance are conflicting. The literature does not provide clear answers
to these questions, and the high variability in the individual studies makes consolidation of these reports in the form of meta-analysis difficult to interpret because the studies are so
different that it is comparing “apples to oranges.” Additional research is necessary to reconcile the controversial areas and fully understand the role of ESIs in pain management.
The coverage determined within this policy is based on the available literature and maintains access to this service, despite the limitations and unknowns, to ensure access to
non-surgical options for beneficiaries.

General Information

Associated Information Refer to the Local Coverage Article: Billing and Coding: Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain
Management DA58993 for documentation requirements, and all coding information.

Sources of Information N/A

Bibliography 1. Bicket MC, Chakravarthy K, Chang D, Cohen SP. Epidural steroid injections: an updated
review on recent trends in safety and complications. PainManag.2015;5(2):129-146.
2. Chou R, Hashimoto R, Friedly J, et al. Pain Management Injection Therapies for Low
Back Pain. [Review]. 2015; . Accessed 1/5/2021.
3. Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
QuickStats: Percentage* of Adults Aged ≥18 Years Who Had Lower Back Pain in the

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
Past 3 Months,† by Sex and Age Group — National Health Interview Survey,§ United States, 2018. 2020;
H.pdf . Accessed 11/19/2020.
4. Zhao L, Manchikanti L, Kaye AD, Abd-Elsayed A. Treatment of Discogenic Low Back Pain: Current Treatment Strategies and Future Options-a Literature Review. CurrPain
HeadacheRep. 2019;23(11):86.
5. Helm S, 2nd, Racz GB, Gerdesmeyer L, et al. Percutaneous and Endoscopic Adhesiolysis in Managing Low Back and Lower Extremity Pain: A Systematic Review and Meta-
analysis. PainPhysician.2016;19(2):E245-282.
6. Kim ED, Bak HH, Jo DH, Park HJ. Clinical efficacy of transforaminal epidural injection for management of zoster-associated pain: a retrospective analysis. SkeletalRadiol.
2018;47(2):253-260.
7. MacVicar J, King W, Landers MH, Bogduk N. The effectiveness of lumbar transforaminal injection of steroids: a comprehensive review with systematic analysis of the published
data. PainMedicine.2013;14(1):14-28.
8. Mattie R, Schneider BJ, Smith C. Frequency of Epidural Steroid Injections. PainMedicine.
2020;21(5):1078-1079.
9. Chou R, Qaseem A, Snow V, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of low back pain: a joint clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians and the American
Pain Society. AnnInternMed.2007;147(7):478-491.
10. Kamper SJ, Apeldoorn AT, Chiarotto A, et al. Multidisciplinary biopsychosocial rehabilitation for chronic low back pain: Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis.
2015;350.
11. Epidural Steroid Injections & Selective Spinal Blocks. In. NorthAmericanSpineSociety (NASS)CoveragePolicyRecommendationsSelectiveSpinalNerveBlocks. 2020.
12. American Society of Anesthesiologist. Practice Guidelines for Chronic Pain Management: An Updated Report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task
Force on Chronic Pain Management and the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine. Anesthesiology. 2010;112(4):810-833.
13. Vorobeychik Y, Sharma A, Smith CC, et al. The Effectiveness and Risks of Non-Image-
Guided Lumbar Interlaminar Epidural Steroid Injections: A Systematic Review with
Comprehensive Analysis of the Published Data. PainMed.2016;17(12):2185-2202.
14. Benzon HT, Huntoon MA, Rathmell JP. Improving the safety of epidural steroid injections. Jama. 2015;313(17):1713-1714.
15. NASS. North American Spine Society Evidence-Based Clinical Guidelines for
Multidisciplinary Spine Care: Diagnosis & Treatment of Low Back Pain 2020.
16. Van Boxem K, Rijsdijk M, Hans G, et al. Safe use of epidural corticosteroid injections:
recommendations of the WIP Benelux Work Group. PainPract. 2019;19(1):61-92.
17. Sharma AK, Vorobeychik Y, Wasserman R, et al. The Effectiveness and Risks of
Fluoroscopically Guided Lumbar Interlaminar Epidural Steroid Injections: A Systematic

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
Review with Comprehensive Analysis of the Published Data. PainMed.2017;18(2):239- 251.
18. Wang E, Wang D, reports h. Treatment of cervicogenic headache with cervical epidural steroid injection. Currentpain. 2014;18(9):442.
19. Pangarkar SS, Kang DG, Sandbrink F, et al. VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline:
Diagnosis and Treatment of Low Back Pain. JGenInternMed.2019;34(11):2620-2629.
20. Armon C, Argoff CE, Samuels J, Backonja MM. Assessment: Use of epidural steroid injections to treat radicular lumbosacral pain Report of the Therapeutics and
Technology Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Neurology. 2007;68:723-729.
21. Title XVIII of the Social Security Act: Sec. 1861.(s)(2) PartE—MiscellaneousProvisions:
DefinitionsofServices,Institutions,etc. 2021;
. Accessed 4-1, 2021.
22. Title XVIII of the Social Security Act: Sec. 1862.(14). ExclusionsFromCoverageand MedicareasSecondaryPayer 2021;
. Accessed 4/1, 2021.
23. Rondinelli RD, Genovese E, Katz RT, et al. AMAguidestotheevaluationofpermanent impairment,SixthEdition.2008.
24. Pengel HM, Maher CG, Refshauge KM. Systematic review of conservative interventions for subacute low back pain. ClinRehabil.2002;16(8):811-820.
25. Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, McLean RM, Forciea MA. Noninvasive Treatments for Acute, Subacute, and Chronic Low Back Pain: A Clinical Practice Guideline From the American
College of Physicians. AnnInternMed.2017;166(7):514-530.
26. Lee JH, Choi KH, Kang S, et al. Nonsurgical treatments for patients with radicular pain from lumbosacral disc herniation. SpineJ. 2019;19:1478-1489.
27. Yang S, Kim W, Kong HH, Hee K, Choi KH. Epidural steroid injection versus conservative treatment for patients with lumbosacral radicular pain: A meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Medicine(Baltimore). 2020;99:e21283.
28. Bernstein IA, Malik Q, Carville S, Ward S. Low back pain and sciatica: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ. 2017;356:i6748.
29. Patel ND, Broderick DF, Burns J, et al. ACR appropriateness criteria low back pain. JAm CollRadiol.2016;13(9):1069-1078.
30. Hegmann KT, Travis R, Belcourt RM, et al. Diagnostic Tests for Low Back Disorders. J OccupEnvironMed. 2019;61(4):e155-e168.
31. FDA Drug Safety Communication: FDA requires label changes to warn of rare but serious neurologic problems after epidural corticosteroid injections for pain. 2014;
. Accessed 11/17, 2020.
32. Manchikanti L, Benyamin RM. Key safety considerations when administering epidural steroid injections. PainManag.2015;5(4):261-272.
33. Doan L, Patel H, Aronova Y, Gharibo C. Variations in Interlaminar Epidural Steroid
Injection Practice Patterns by Interventional Pain Management Physicians in the United

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
States. PainPhysician.2018;21(5):E493-E499.
34. El-Yahchouchi CA, Plastaras CT, Maus TP, et al. Adverse Event Rates Associated with Transforaminal and Interlaminar Epidural Steroid Injections: A Multi-Institutional Study.
PainMed.2016;17(2):239-249.
35. Manchikanti L, Malla Y, Wargo B, Cash K, Pampati V, Fellows B. A prospective evaluation of complications of 10,000 fluoroscopically directed epidural injections. Pain
physician.2012;15:131-140.
36. American Society of Anesthesiologists. Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of
General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/Analgesia. 2019;

of-depth-of-sedation-definition-of-general-anesthesia-and-levels-of-sedation- analgesia [asahq.org] Accessed 12/8/2023.
37. Al-Shoha A, Rao DS, Schilling J, Peterson E, Mandel S. Effect of epidural steroid injection on bone mineral density and markers of bone turnover in postmenopausal women.
Spine(PhilaPa1976).2012;37(25):E1567-1571.
38. Mandel S, Schilling J, Peterson E, Rao DS, Sanders W. A retrospective analysis of vertebral body fractures following epidural steroid injections. JBoneJointSurgAm.
2013;95(11):961-964.
39. Manchikanti L, Pampati V, Beyer C, Damron K, Cash K, Moss T. The effect of neuraxial steroids on weight and bone mass density: a prospective evaluation. PainPhysician.
2000;3(4):357-366.
40. Kim M, Yang YH, Son HJ, et al. Effect of medications and epidural steroid injections on fractures in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. Medicine(Baltimore).
2019;98(26):e16080.
41. Sytsma TT, Greenlund LK, Greenlund LS. Joint corticosteroid injection associated with increased influenza risk. MayoClinProcInnovQualOutcomes. 2018;2(2):194-198.
42. Shanthanna H, Cohen SP, Strand N, et al. Recommendations on Chronic Pain Practice during the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Joint Statement by American Society of Regional
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine (ASRA) and European Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Therapy (ESRA). 2020. Accessed 2/10/2021.
43. Manchikanti L, Benyamin R, Swicegood J, et al. Assessment of practice patterns of perioperative management of antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy in interventional
pain management. PainPhysician.2012;15(6):E955-968.
44. Manchikanti L, Abdi S, Atluri S, et al. An update of comprehensive evidence-based guidelines for interventional techniques in chronic spinal pain. Part II: guidance and
recommendations. PainPhysician.2013;16(2 Suppl):S49-283.
45. Smith CC, Schneider B, McCormick ZL, et al. Risks and Benefits of Ceasing or Continuing
Anticoagulant Medication for Image-Guided Procedures for Spine Pain: A Systematic Review. PainMed.2018;19(3):438-448.
46. (NASS) NASS. Choosing Wisely: Five Things Physicians and Patients Should Question.
2013.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
47. Akuthota V, Bogduk N, Easa J, et al. Lumbar Transforaminal Epidural Steroid Injections Review & Recommendation Statement. Paper presented at: North American Spine
Society2013.
48. Hashemi M, Dadkhah P, Taheri M, Abootorabi SMHS, Naderi-nabi B. Ultrasound-Guided
Lumbar Transforaminal Epidural Injections; A Single Center Fluoroscopic Validation Study. BullEmergTrauma. 2019;7(3):251.
49. Przkora R, Kinsky MP, Fisher SR, et al. Functional Improvements Utilizing the Short
Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) in the Elderly after Epidural Steroid Injections. Curr PainHeadacheRep. 2019;23(2):14.
50. Riew KD, Park J-B, Cho Y-S, et al. Nerve root blocks in the treatment of lumbar radicular pain: a minimum five-year follow-up. JBoneJointSurgAm. 2006;88(8):1722-1725.
51. Carette S, Leclaire R, Marcoux S, et al. Epidural corticosteroid injections for sciatica due to herniated nucleus pulposus. NEnglJMed.1997;336(23):1634-1640.
52. Chou R, Hashimoto R, Friedly J, et al. Epidural Corticosteroid Injections for Radiculopathy and Spinal Stenosis: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. AnnIntern
Med. 2015;163(5):373-381.
53. Bhatia A, Flamer D, Shah PS, Cohen SP. Transforaminal Epidural Steroid Injections for
Treating Lumbosacral Radicular Pain from Herniated Intervertebral Discs: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. AnesthAnalg.2016;122(3):857-870.
54. Kaye AD, Manchikanti L, Abdi S, et al. Efficacy of Epidural Injections in Managing
Chronic Spinal Pain: A Best Evidence Synthesis. PainPhysician.2015;18(6):E939-1004.
55. Manchikanti L. Epidural injections for lumbar radiculopathy and spinal stenosis: a comparative systematic review and meta-analysis. PainPhysician.2016;19:E365-E410.
56. Kennedy DJ, Zheng PZ, Smuck M, McCormick ZL, Huynh L, Schneider BJ. A minimum of 5-year follow-up after lumbar transforaminal epidural steroid injections in patients with
lumbar radicular pain due to intervertebral disc herniation. SpineJ. 2018;18(1):29-35.
57. Oliveira CB, Maher CG, Ferreira ML, et al. Epidural corticosteroid injections for lumbosacral radicular pain. CochraneDatabaseSystRev. 2020;4.
58. Smith CC, McCormick ZL, Mattie R, MacVicar J, Duszynski B, Stojanovic MP. The effectiveness of lumbar transforaminal injection of steroid for the treatment of radicular
pain: A comprehensive review of the published data. PainMed 2020;21:472-487.
59. Friedly JL, Comstock BA, Turner JA, et al. A randomized trial of epidural glucocorticoid injections for spinal stenosis. NEnglJMed.2014;371(1):11-21.
60. Manchikanti L, Candido KD, Kaye AD, et al. Randomized trial of epidural injections for spinal stenosis published in the New England Journal of Medicine: further confusion
without clarification. PainPhysician.2014;17(4):E475-488.
61. Deer TR, Grider JS, Pope JE, et al. The MIST Guidelines: The Lumbar Spinal Stenosis
Consensus Group Guidelines for Minimally Invasive Spine Treatment. PainPract.
2019;19(3):250-274.
62. Davis N, Hourigan P, Clarke A. Transforaminal epidural steroid injection in lumbar spinal stenosis: an observational study with two-year follow-up. BrJNeurosurg.

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
2017;31(2):205-208.
63. Ciocon JO, Galindo-Ciocon D, Amaranath L, Galindo D. Caudal epidural blocks for elderly patients with lumbar canal stenosis. JAmGeriatrSoc. 1994;42(6):593-596.
64. Manchikanti L, Cash KA, McManus CD, Damron KS, Pampati V, Falco FJ. A randomized, double-blind controlled trial of lumbar interlaminar epidural injections in central spinal
stenosis: 2-year follow-up. PainPhysician.2015;18:79-92.
65. Friedly JL, Comstock BA, Turner JA, et al. Long-Term Effects of Repeated Injections of
Local Anesthetic With or Without Corticosteroid for Lumbar Spinal Stenosis: A
Randomized Trial. ArchPhysMedRehabil.2017;98(8):1499-1507 e1492.
66. Huang R, Meng Z, Cao Y, et al. Nonsurgical medical treatment in the management of pain due to lumbar disc prolapse: A network meta-analysis. SeminArthritisRheum.
2019;49(2):303-313.
67. Park KD, Lee WY, Lee J, Park MH, Ahn JK, Park Y. Factors Associated with the Outcome of Ultrasound-Guided Trochanteric Bursa Injection in Greater Trochanteric Pain
Syndrome: A Retrospective Cohort Study. Painphysician. 2016;19(4):E547-557.
68. Jang SH, Chang MC. At Least 5-Year Follow-up After Transforaminal Epidural Steroid
Injection Due to Lumbar Radicular Pain Caused by Spinal Stenosis. PainPract.
2020;20(7):748-751.
69. Pennington Z, Swanson MA, Lubelski D, et al. Comparing the short-term cost- effectiveness of epidural steroid injections and medical management alone for
discogenic lumbar radiculopathy. ClinNeurolNeurosurg. 2020;191:105675.
70. Stav A OL, Sternberg A, Kaadan M, Weksler N. Cervical epidural steroid injection for cervicobrachialgia. ActaAnaesthesiolScand.1993;37:562-566.
71. Arirachakaran A, Siripaiboonkij M, Pairuchvej S, et al. Comparative outcomes of epidural steroids versus placebo after lumbar discectomy in lumbar disc herniation: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. EurJOrthopSurgTraumatol.
2018;28(8):1589-1599.
72. Akbas M, Elawamy A, Salem H, Fouad Z, Abbas N, Dagistan G. Comparison of 3 approaches to percutaneous epidural adhesiolysis and neuroplasty in post lumbar
surgery syndrome. PainPhysician.2018;21:E501-E508.
73. Bono CM, Ghiselli G, Gilbert TJ, et al. An evidence-based clinical guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of cervical radiculopathy from degenerative disorders.
2011;11(1):64-72.
74. Manchikanti L, Nampiaparampil DE, Candido KD, et al. Do cervical epidural injections provide long-term relief in neck and upper extremity pain? A systematic review. Pain
Physician. 2015;18(1):39-60.
75. Diwan S, Manchikanti L, Benyamin RM, et al. Effectiveness of cervical epidural injections in the management of chronic neck and upper extremity pain. PainPhysician.
2012;15(4):E405-434.
76. Manchikanti L, Knezevic NN, Navani A, et al. Epidural Interventions in the Management of Chronic Spinal Pain: American Society of Interventional Pain Physicians (ASIPP)

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
Comprehensive Evidence-Based Guidelines. PainPhysician.2021;24(S1):S27-s208.
77. Cohen SP, Hayek S, Semenov Y, et al. Epidural steroid injections, conservative treatment, or combination treatment for cervical radicular pain: a multicenter, randomized,
comparative-effectiveness study. Anesthesiology. 2014;121(5):1045-1055.
78. Lee JW, Hwang SY, Lee GY, Lee E, Kang HS. Fluoroscopic cervical paramidline interlaminar epidural steroid injections for cervical radiculopathy: effectiveness and
outcome predictors. SkeletalRadiol.2014;43(7):933-938.
79. Manchikanti L, Malla Y, Cash K, Pampati V, Hirsch J. Comparison of effectiveness for fluoroscopic cervical interlaminar epidural injections with or without steroid in cervical
post-surgery syndrome. KoreanJPain. 2018;31:277-288.
80. Conger A, Cushman D, Speckman R, Burnham T, Teramoto M, McCormick Z. The effectiveness of fluoroscopically guided cervical transforaminal epidural steroid injection
for the treatment of radicular pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PainMed.
2020;21:41-54.
81. Mesregah MK, Feng W, Huang WH, et al. Clinical effectiveness of interlaminar epidural injections of local anesthetic with or without steroids for managing chronic neck pain: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. PainPhysician 2020;23:335-348.
82. Kleimeyer JP, Koltsov J, Smuck MW, Wood KB, Cheng I, Hu SS. Cervical epidural steroid injections: Incidence and determinants of subsequent surgery. SpineJ. 2020;20:1729-
1736.
83. Benyamin RM, Wang VC, Vallejo R, Singh V, Helm Ii S. A systematic evaluation of thoracic interlaminar epidural injections. PainPhysician.2012;15(4):E497-514.
84. Manchikanti L, Cash KA, McManus CD, Pampati V, Benyamin RM. Thoracic interlaminar epidural injections in managing chronic thoracic pain: a randomized, double-blind,
controlled trial with a 2-year follow-up. PainPhysician.2014;17(3):E327-338.
85. Joswig H, Neff A, Ruppert C, Hildebrandt G, Stienen MN. Repeat epidural steroid injections for radicular pain due to lumbar or cervical disc herniation: what happens
after 'salvage treatment'? BoneJointJ. 2018;100-B(10):1364-1371.
86. Brändle K, Stienen MN, Neff A, Hildebrandt G, Joswig H. Ten-day response to CT-guided spinal infiltration therapy in more than a thousand patients. JNeurolSurgACentEur
Neurosurg. 2016;77(03):181-194.
87. Murthy N, Geske J, Shelerud R, et al. The effectiveness of repeat lumbar transforaminal epidural steroid injections. Painmedicine.2014;15(10):1686-1694.
88. Wang JC, Lin E, Brodke DS, Youssef JA. Epidural injections for the treatment of symptomatic lumbar herniated discs. ClinSpineSurg. 2002;15(4):269-272.
89. Ekedahl H, Jönsson B, Annertz M, Frobell RB, rehabilitation. The 1-year results of lumbar transforaminal epidural steroid injection in patients with chronic unilateral radicular
pain: the relation to MRI findings and clinical features. AmJPhysMedRehabil.
2017;96(9):654-662.
90. Arden NK, Price C, Reading I, et al. A multicentre randomized controlled trial of epidural corticosteroid injections for sciatica: the WEST study. Rheumatology(Oxford).

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
2005;44(11):1399-1406.
91. Lee JH, Lee SH. Can repeat injection provide clinical benefit in patients with cervical disc herniation and stenosis when the first epidural injection results only in partial response?
Medicine(Baltimore). 2016;95(29):e4131.
92. Bicket MC, Gupta A, Brown CH, Cohen SP. Epidural injections for spinal pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis evaluating the “control” injections in randomized
controlled trials. Anesthesiology. 2013;119:907-931.
93. Manchikanti L, Nampiaparampil DE, Manchikanti KN, et al. Comparison of the efficacy of saline, local anesthetics, and steroids in epidural and facet joint injections for the
management of spinal pain: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Surg NeurolInt. 2015;6(Suppl 4):S194-235.
94. Manchikanti L, Knezevic NN, Sanapati J, Kaye AD, Sanapati M, Hirsch JA. Is epidural injection of sodium chloride solution a true placebo or an active control agent? A
systematic review and meta-analysis. PainPhysician.2021;24:41-59.
95. Knezevic NN, Manchikanti L, Urits I, et al. Lack of superiority of epidural injections with lidocaine with steroids compared to without steroids in spinal pain: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. PainPhysician 2020;23:S239-S270.
96. Manchikanti L, Knezevic NN, Parr AT, Kaye AD, Sanapati M, Hirsch JA. Does epidural bupivacaine with or without steroids provide long-term relief? A systematic review and
meta-analysis. CurrPainHeadacheRep. 2020;24(26):15.
97. Bensler S, Sutter R, Pfirrmann CW, Peterson CK. Is there a difference in treatment outcomes between epidural injections with particulate versus non-particulate steroids?
EurRadiol.2017(27):1505-1511.
98. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. 12-014/S038. 2011.
99. Feeley IH, Healy EF, Noel J, Kiely PJ, Murphy TM. Particulate and non-particulate steroids in spinal epidurals: A systematic review and meta-analysis. EurSpineJ. 2017;26:336-
344.
100. Mehta P, Syrop I, Singh JR, Kirschner J. Systematic review of the efficacy of particulate versus nonparticulate corticosteroids in epidural injections. PMR. 2017(9):502-512.
101. Manchikanti L, Falco F, Benyamin R, Kaye A, Boswell M, Hirsch J. A modified approach to grading of evidence. PainPhysician.2014;17:E319-E325.
102. Chou R, Deyo R, Friedly J, et al. Systemic Pharmacologic Therapies for Low Back Pain: A
Systematic Review for an American College of Physicians Clinical Practice Guideline.
AnnInternMed.2017;166(7):480-494.
103. Watters WC, Resnick DK, Eck JC, et al. Guideline update for the performance of fusion procedures for degenerative disease of the lumbar spine. Part 13: injection therapies,
low-back pain, and lumbar fusion. JNeurosurgSpine. 2014;21(1):79-90.
104. Narouze S, Benzon HT, Provenzano D, et al. Interventional Spine and Pain Procedures in Patients on Antiplatelet and Anticoagulant Medications: Guidelines from the American
Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, the European Society of Regional Anaesthesia and Pain Therapy, the American Academy of Pain Medicine, the

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)
International Neuromodulation Society, the North American Neuromodulation Society, and the World Institute of Pain. RegAnesthPainMed. 2018;43(3):225-262.

Revision History Information

Revision Revision
History History Reasons for
Date Number Revision History Explanation Change

09/11/2025 R2 Revision Effective Date: Change in 09/11/2025 Affiliated
Contract CONTRACTOR INFORMATION:
Numbers

Added: JF contractor information

This update is to consolidate JE | and JF to have one unified document and policy number.

Pursuant to the 21st Century | Cures Act, this revision does | not require notice and comment | because this update is | considered non-substantive | and does not alter the intent of | coverage or non-coverage outlined in any LCD.

06/19/2022 R1 Updated hyperlink for reference Other (Updated 36 under Bibliography. hyperlink in | Bibliography)

Associated Documents

LCD - Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (L39240)

Attachments N/A

Related Local Coverage Documents | Articles DA58993 - Billing and Coding: Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management (MCD
Archive Site)
A58993 - Billing and Coding: Epidural Steroid Injections for Pain Management A59079 - Response to Comments: Epidural Steroid Procedures Injections for Pain
Management A59115 - Response to Comments: Epidural Steroid Procedures Injections for Pain
Management | LCDs DL38801 - Facet Joint Interventions for Pain Management (MCD Archive Site)

Related National Coverage Documents | NCDs N/A

Public Versions

Updated On Effective Dates Status

09/02/2025 09/11/2025 - N/A Currently in Effect You are here

12/11/2023 06/19/2022 - 09/10/2025 Superseded View

04/29/2022 06/19/2022 - N/A Superseded View

Keywords

N/A